i Free distribution by A.P. GovernmentSri M. Ramabrahmam,  Lecturer,
Govt. IASE, Masabtank,
Hyderabad.Prof. Kamal Mahendroo ,
Vidya Bhavan Educational Resource Centre,
Udaipur, Rajasthan.
Dr. TVS Ramesh ,
Co-ordinator, C&T Dept.,
SCERT, AP, Hyderabad.Miss. Preeti Misra ,
Vidya Bhavan Educational Resource Centre,
Udaipur, Rajasthan.
Co-ordinatorsAcademic SupportEditors
Published by the Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderbad.
Respect the Law
Get the RightsGrow by Education
Behave HumblyPHYSICAL SCIENCEPHYSICAL SCIENCEPHYSICAL SCIENCEPHYSICAL SCIENCEPHYSICAL SCIENCE
CLASS X
Dr.B. Krishnarajulu Naidu ,
Retd., Professor of Physics
Osmania University, Hyderabad.Dr.M. Adinarayana ,
Retd., Professor of Chemistry
Osmania University, Hyderabad.
Dr. M. Salagram
Retd., Professor of Physics
Osmania University, Hyderabad.Dr. K. Venkateswara Rao
Retd., Reader in Chemistry
New Science College, Hyderabad.
Dr. N. Upendar Reddy ,
Professor & Head C&T Dept.,
SCERT., A.P., Hyderabad.Dr. C.V. Sarveswara Sharma
Retd., Reader in Physics
Amalapuram.
ii© Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad.
New Edition
First Published 2014
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or byany means without the prior permission in writing of thepublisher, nor be otherwise circulated in any form ofbinding or cover other than that in which it is publishedand without a similar condition including this conditionbeing imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
The copy right holder of this book is the Directorof  School Education, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh.We have used some photographs which are undercreative common licence. They are acknowledgedat the end of the book.
This Book has been printed on 70 G.S.M. S.S. Maplitho,
Title Page 200 G.S.M. White Art Card
Free Distribution by Government of Andhra Pradesh
Printed in India
at the Andhra Pradesh Govt. Text  Book Press,
Mint Compound, Hyderabad,
Andhra Pradesh.

iii Free distribution by A.P. GovernmentSri R. Ananda Kumar,  SA,
ZPHS Gavaravaram, Visakhapatnam.
Sri Madhusudhana Reddy Dandala,  SA,
ZPHS Munagala, Nalgonda.
Sri S. Naushad Ali,  SA,
ZPHS G.D. Nellore, Chittoor.
Sri S. Brahmananda Reddy,  SA,
ZPHS Immadicheruvu, Prakasam.Sri S.U. Siva Ram Prasad,  SA,
GBHS Sultan Bazar, Hyderabad.
Sri K.V .K. Srikanth,  SA,
GTWAHS S.L.Puram, Srikakulam.
Sri M. Eswara Rao , SA,
GHS Sompeta, Srikakulam
Sri K. Gagan Kumar,  SA,
ZPHS Mirzapur, Nizamabad.Text Book Development Committee
Writers
Cover page, Graphics & DesigningSri G. Gopal Reddy , Director,
S.C.E.R.T. , A.P., Hyderabad.Sri B. Sudhakar , Director,
Govt. Textbook printing press,
A.P., Hyderabad.
Dr. N. Upendar Reddy ,
Professor & Head C&T Dept.,
S.C.E.R.T., A.P., Hyderabad.
Sri M. Ramabrahmam,  Lecturer,
Govt. IASE, Masabtank, Hyderabad.
Sri K. Sudhakara Chary,  SGT,
UPS Neelikurthy, Warangal.
Sri Kurra Suresh Babu,  B.Tech, MA., MPhill.
Mana Media Graphics, Hyderabad.Sri Kishan Thatoju,  Graphic Designer,
C&T Dept.,SCERT, AP, Hyderabad.
ivIntro ...
We believe that class-10 education is a key aspect of school education and a
turning point in student’s life. The present tenth class Science textbook in your
hands is developed in accordance with the National and State Curriculum Framework
and the Right to Education Act. This book helps the student to review various
concepts that were learned through the learning experiences provided in the schooland to get comprehensive knowledge about these conecepts. The lessons in the
textbooks are presented in such way that they help in preparing the student for
competitive examinations and also to prepare him/her for intermediate education.
The new science textbooks are specially designed with suitable pedagogy in
tune with Continuous Comprehensive Evaluation (CCE) which we are right now
implementing in school education. These textbooks help the teacher to assess
students learning during teaching learning processes. They facilitate effective learning
of various concepts of science in scientific method apart from getting knowledgeabout concepts. It is essential to complete the syllabus in the stipulated time as
students have to write the Board Examination in class-10. But don’t forget that
completion of syllabus means making the students understand the concepts andtrying to achieve the learning competencies. It is mandatory on the part of teacher
to implement teaching strategies like, making the student to read the content of
the textbook, discussion, analysis, lab activity, field trips, preparing reports, etc.Teacher must take special care to avoid the practice of rote memorisation of
scientific information from guides and question banks.
The classroom teaching of science must be in such a way that it encourages
children to think and work scientifically. Also, it must enhance love towards nature.
Even it should enable to comprehend and appreciate the laws governing the naturein constructing so much diversity all around. Scientific learning is not just disclosing
new things. It is also necessary to step forward without interrupting the
interrelationship and interdependency along with understanding of the nature’sintrinsic principles.High School children possess cognitive capacity of comprehending
the nature and characteristics of the transforming world surrounding them. And
they are able to analyze abstract concepts.
At this level, we cannot quench their sharp thinking capability with the dryteaching
of mere equations and theoretic principles. For that, we should create a learningenvironment in the classroom which provides an opportunity for them to apply the
scientific knowledge, explore multiple alternatives in solving problems and establish
new relations.
Scientific learning is not just confined to the four walls of classroom. It has a
definite connection to lab and field as well. Therefore, there is a lot of importanceto field experience/ experiments in science teaching.
v Free distribution by A.P. Government
There is a great need for compulsory implementation of instructions of the
National Curriculum Framework- 2005 which emphasizes linking of the science teaching
with local environment. The Right to Education Act- 2009 also suggested that
priority should be given to the achievement of learning competencies among children.
Likewise, science teaching should be in such a way that it would help cultivate a
new generation with scientific thinking.
The key aspect of science teaching is to make the children understand the
thinking process of scientists and their efforts behind each discovery. The State
Curriculum Framework- 2011 stated thatchildren should be able to express their
own ideas and opinions on various aspects. These Science Text Books are prepared
to meet the set standards of the SCF and thus assist children in becoming self-reliant researchers capable of thinking intensely in scientific terms.
The new textbooks are developed to achieve desired academic standards. So
teachers should develop various teaching learning strategies to make their students
to achieve class specific academic standards.  We should avoid rote learning methods
for the successful implementation of Continuous Comprehensive Evaluation (CCE).It is very impart to know more about different methods to assess students’
progress  by summative and formative evaluation. The new textbooks reflect
Continuous Comprehensive Evaluation and teaching method with respect to discussedconcepts. This is very useful to teachers and students.
In the new textbooks, the design of concepts and activities help in achieving
the specified academic standards. Teachers need to plan appropriate teaching
strategies to improve the academic standards among the students by the end of
teaching the lesson. For effective implementation of continuous comprehensiveevaluation the teaching must move away from the methods of rote memorisation
of concepts. There is a need for teachers to have a good understanding of the
methods of evaluation which help them in assessing the progress of children in aconstructive and comprehensive way. The new textbooks are not confined to
simply provide necessary informations about concepts. Instead they focus on the
new teaching strategies and evaluation techniques which are very important forboth teachers and students.
We thank the VidyaBhavan Society, Rajasthan for their cooperation in designing
these new text books,the writers for preparing the lessons, the editors for checkingthe textual matters and the DTP group for cutely composing the textbook. We
invite suggestions from educationists, teachers, parents, students and others to
make this book more meaningful.
Teachers play a pivotal role in children’s comprehensive use of the text book.
We hope, teachers will make their best efforts for proper utilization of the text bookso as to inculcate scientific thinking among children and inspire them to be great
scientists.
           Director,
SCERT, AP, Hyderabad
vi
Dear teachers...
New Science Text Books are prepared in such a way that they develop children’s observation
power and research enthusiasm. The official documents of  National and State Curriculum Frame
Works and the Right to Education Act are aspairing to bring grossroute changes in scienceteaching. These textbooks are adopted in accordance with such an aspiration. Hence, scienceteachers need to adapt to the new approach in their teaching.
In view of this, let us observe certain  Dos and Don’t s:
•There is an immediate need to discard the practices adopted in the schools on a false belief
that teaching of 10th class means preparing the children for public examination. In 10th
class the teaching learning process should focus on achieving the academic standards rather
winning race of scoring marks.
•Avoid practices like using guides and question banks, asking the children to read only
important questions, focussing on lessons which help in scoring more marks.
•Read the lesson thoroughly before you start teaching and ask the children to read the text.Then initiate a discussion to make the children understand the concepts in the lessons.
•Encourage children to express their own views and ideas while writing the answers. Give
weightage to such type of writing in examination.
•Some instructions are given in the textbook regarding the collection of certain information
by the teacher. Collect such information and make it available to students.
•In public examination, the weightage will be given to all aspects of the syllabus. Exceptforeword of the textbook everything else must be treated as a part of the curriculum.
•Textual concepts are presented in two ways: one as the classroom teaching and the otheras the laboratory performance.
•Lab activities are part and parcel of a lesson. So, teachers must make the children conduct
all such activities during the lesson itself, but not separately.
•Teachers are advised to follow the following teaching steps while transacting lessons-mindmapping, reading lesson and identifyng new words by children, performing activities,
demonstration and discussion, conclusion and evaluation.
•In the text, some special activities are presented as box items: ‘think and discuss, let us do,
conduct interview, prepare report, display in wall magazine, participate in Theatre Day, do
field observation, organize special days’. To perform all of them is compulsory.
•The abbreviation (A.S.) given at the end of each question in the section “Improve your
learning” indicates academic standard.
•Collect information of relevant website addresses and pass on to students so that they can
utilize internet services for learning science on their own.
•Plan and execute activities like science club, elocution, drawing, writing poetry on science,making models etc.to develop positive attitude among children about environment,
biodiversity, ecological balance etc.
vii Free distribution by A.P. Government
•As a part of continuous comprehensive evaluation, observe and record children’s
learning abilities during various activities conducted in classroom, laboratory and field.
We believe, you must have realized that the learning of science and scientific thinking are
not mere drilling of the lessons but, in fact, a valuable exercise in motivating the children to
explore for solutions to the problems systematically and preparing them to meet life’s challengesproperly.
Dear Students...
Learning science does not mean scoring good marks in the subject. Competencies like
thinking logically and working systematically, learned through it,have to be practiced in daily
life. To achieve this, instead of memorizing the scientific theories by rote, one must be able to
study them analytically. That means, in order to understand the concepts of science, you need
to proceed by discussing, describing, conducting experiments to verify, making observations,confirming with your own ideas and drawing conclusions. This textbook helps you to learn inthat way.
What you need to do to achieve such things:
•In 10th class the range of concepts is wide. So go through each lesson thoroughly
before the teacher actually deals with it.
•Note down the points you came across so that you can grasp the lesson better.
•Think of the principles in the lesson. Identify the concepts you need to know further,
to understand the lesson in depth.
•Do not hesitate to discuss analytically about the questions given under the sub-heading
‘Think and Discuss’ with your friends or teachers.
•You may get some doubts while conducting an experiment or discussing about a lesson.Express them freely and clearly.
•Plan to implement experiment/lab periods together with teachers, to understand theconcepts clearly. While learning through the experiments you may come to knowmany more things.
•Observe how each lesson is helpful to conserve nature. Put what you learnt into practice.
•Analyse how each teaching point has relation with daily life and discuss the things you
learned in your science class with farmers, artisans etc.
•Work as a group during interviews and field trips. Preparing reports and displaying
them is a must. Discuss on the report prepared.
•List out the observations regarding each lesson to be carried through internet, schoollibrary and laboratory.
•Whether in note book or exams, write analytically, expressing your own opinions.
•Read books related to your text book, as many as you can.
•You organize yourself the Science Club programs in your school.
•Observe problems faced by the people in your locality and find out what solutions you
can suggest through your science classroom.
viiiACADEMIC STANDARDS
S.No. Academic Standard Explanation
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.Conceptual understanding
Asking questions and
making hypothesis
Experimentation and field
investigation.
Information skills and
Projects
Communication through
drawing, model making
Appreciation and
aesthetic sense, values
Application to daily life,
concern to bio diversity.Children are able to explain, cite examples, give reasons,
and give comparison and differences, explain the processof given concepts in the textbook. Children are able to
develop their own brain mappings.
Children are able to ask questions to understand, to
clarify the concepts and to participate in discussions.They are able to make hypothesis on given issues.
To understand given concepts in the textbook children
are able to do experiments on their own. They are ableto participate in field investigation and making reportson them.
Children are able to collect information (by using
interviews, internet etc.) and analyses systematically.They are able to conduct their own project works.
Children are able to explain their conceptual
understanding by drawing figures and making models.Able to ploting graphs by using given information orcollected data.
Children are able to appreciate man power and nature,
and have aesthetic sense towards nature. They are alsoable to follow constitutional values.
Children are able to utilize scientific concept to face
their daily life situations. They are able to show concerntowards bio diversity.
ix Free distribution by A.P. GovernmentHeatPage No. Periods Month
11111
Chemical Reactions and Equations22222
Reflection of light by different surfaces33333
Acids, Bases and Salts44444
Refraction of Light at Plane Surfaces55555
Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces66666
Human Eye and Colourful world77777
Structure of Atom88888
Classification of Elements- The Periodic Table99999
1010101010
Electric Current1111111111
Electromagnetism1212121212
Principles of Metallurgy1313131313
Carbon and its Compounds1414141414
Reference Books8 June 1-19
8 July 20-44
8 July 45-688 Aug 69-929 Aug 93-11110 Sept 112-1348 Sept-Oct 135-159
5 Oct 160-17510 Nov 176-201
10 Nov-Dec 202-227
9 Dec 228-257
10 Dec-Jan 258-285
5 Jan 286-30112 Feb 302-341
342
Chemical BondingINDEX
x
OUR  NATIONAL  ANTHEM
- Rabindranath Tagore
Jana gana mana adhinayaka Jaya he
Bharatha bhagya-vidhata
Punjab Sindhu Gujaratha Maratha
Dravida Utkala Banga.
Vindhya Himachala Jamuna Ganga
Uchchala Jaladhi taranga,
Tava shubha name jage
Tava shubha asisha mage
Gahe tava jaya gatha
Jana gana mangala-dayaka jaya he,
Bharatha bhagya –vidhatha,
Jaya he, jaha he, jaya he,
Jaya jaya jaya jaya he
PLEDGE
“India is my country; all Indians are my brothers and sisters.
I love my country, and I am proud of its rich and varied heritage.
I shall always strive to be worthy of it.
I shall give my parents, teachers and all elders respect,
and treat everyone with courtesy. I shall be kind to animals.
To my country and my people, I pledge my devotion.
In their well-being and prosperity alone lies my happiness.”
Free distribution by A.P. Government 1Recall the experiments you did in Class 7 with the glass tumblers
containing of cold water, lukewarm water and hot water. We understood
that ‘hot’ and ‘cold’ are relative terms and that heat was a form of energy.
We use the terms “Temperature and Heat” to describe these observations.
These words, technically, have special meanings. In order to understandtheir meanings let us do some activities
Activity 1
Take a piece of wood and a piece of metal and keep them in a fridge or
ice box. After 15 minutes, take them out and ask your friend to touch them.
•Which is colder? Why?
When we keep materials in a fridge, they become cold i.e., they lose
heat energy. The iron and wooden pieces were kept in the fridge for the
same period of time but we feel that the metal piece is colder than the
wooden piece.
•What could be the reason for this difference in coldness?
•Does it have any relation to the transfer of heat energy from our body
to the object?
When you touch the metal or wooden piece, you feel that they are
cold. This means that heat energy is being transferred from your finger to
the pieces. When you remove your finger, you don’t get a feeling of
‘coldness’. This means that when heat energy flows out of your body youget the feeling of ‘coldness’ and when heat energy enters your body you
get a feeling of ‘hotness’. You can test this by bringing your finger near the
flame of a matchstick!Heat1Chapter

Heat 2 X ClassSo, if you feel that the metal piece is ‘colder’ than the wooden piece,
it must mean that more heat energy flows out of your body when you touch
the metal piece as compared to the wooden piece. In other words, the‘degree of coldness’ of the metal piece is greater than that of the wooden
piece.
The conventional definition of temperature is “the degree of hotness
or coldness”.
We say that the metal piece is at a lower ‘temperature’ as compared to
the wooden piece, when they are taken out of the fridge.
•Why does transfer of heat energy take place between objects ?
•Does transfer of heat take place in all situations?
•What are the conditions for transfer of heat energy?Let us find out
Thermal equilibrium-heat and temperature
When two bodies are placed in thermal contact, heat energy will be
transferred from the ‘hotter’ body to the ‘colder’ body. This transfer of
heat energy continues till both bodies attain the same degree of hotness
(or) coldness. At this stage, we say that the bodies have achieved ‘thermal
equilibrium’. Thus, the state of thermal equilibrium denotes a state of abody where it neither receives nor gives out heat energy.
If you are not feeling either hot or cold in your surroundings, then
your body is said to be in thermal equilibrium with the surrounding
atmosphere. Similarly, the furniture in the room is in thermal equilibrium
with air in the room. So we can say that the furniture and the air in theroom are at the same temperature.
Heat
•What is temperature?
•How can you differentiate it from heat?
Let us find out
Activity 2
Take two cups and fill one of them with hot water and another with
cold water. Now take a laboratory thermometer, observe the mercury level
in it and note it in your book. Keep it in hot water. Observe changes in themercury level. Note the reading.
•What change did you notice in the reading of the thermometer?
(mercury level)?
Free distribution by A.P. Government 3•Did the mercury level increase or decrease?
Now place the thermometer in cold water and observe changes in the
mercury level. Did the level decrease or increase?
We know that bodies in contact achieve thermal equilibrium due to
transfer of heat energy. When you kept the thermometer in hot water you
observe that there is a rise in mercury level. This happens because heat gottransferred from the hotter body (hot water) to the colder body (mercury
in thermometer). Similarly in the second case you will observe that the
mercury level comes down from its initial level because of the transfer ofheat from mercury (hotter body) to water (colder body). Thus we defineheat as follows:
“Heat is a form of energy in transit, that flows from a body at higher
temperature to a body at lower temperature.”
The steadiness of the mercury column of the thermometer indicates
that flow of heat between the thermometer liquid (mercury) and water, has
stopped. Thermal equilibrium has been attained between the water and
thermometer liquid (mercury). The thermometer reading at thermal
equilibrium gives the “temperature”. Thus ‘temperature’ is a measure ofthermal equilibrium.
If two different systems, A and B in thermal contact, are in thermal
equilibrium individually with another system C(thermal contact with A andB), will the systems A and B be in thermal equilibrium with each other?
We know that if A is in thermal equilibrium with C, they both have the
same temperature. Similarly, B and C have the same temperature. Thus Aand B will have the same temperature and would therefore be in thermal
equilibrium with each other. (A,B and C are in thermal contact).
The SI unit of heat is Joule (J) and CGS unit is calorie  (cal).The amount
of heat required to raise the temperature of 1gram of water by 1
0C is called
calorie.
1cal = 4.186 Joules
The SI unit of temperature is Kelvin (K). It can also be expressed as
degree Celsius (0C).
00C = 273K
•How would you convert degree Celsius to Kelvin?
Temperature in Kelvin = 273+Temperature in degree Celsius
Add 273 to the value of temperature in degree Celsius to get the
temperature on the Kelvin scale.
Heat 4 X ClassNote: Temperature measured on Kelvin scale is called absolute
temperature.
Temperature and Kinetic energy
Activity 3
Take two bowls one with hot water and second with cold water. Gently
sprinkle food colour on the surface of the water in both bowls .Observe
the motion of the small grains of food colour.
•How do they move?
•Why do they move randomly?
•Why do the grains in hot water move more rapidly than the grains in
cold water?
You will notice that the grains of food colour jiggle (move randomly).
This happens because the molecules of water in both bowls are in random
motion. We observe that the jiggling of the grains of food colour in hotwater is more when compared to the jiggling in cold water.
We know that bodies possess kinetic energy when they are in
motion.
As the speed of motion of particles (grain of food colour) in the bowls
of water is different, we can say that they have different kinetic
energies.Thus we conclude that the average kinetic energy of molecules /
particles of a hotter body is greater than that of a colder body. So we cansay that the temperature of a body is an indicator of the average kinetic
energy of molecules of that body.
“The average kinetic energy of the molecules is directly proportional
to the absolute temperature”
Activity 4
Take water in a container and heat it to 60°C. Take a
cylindrical transparent glass jar and fill half of it with this
hot water.  Very gently pour coconut oil over the surface of
the water. (Take care that the water and oil do not mix). Put a
lid with two holes on the top of the glass jar. Take two
thermometers and insert them through the holes of the  lid in
such a way that bulb of the one thermometer lies only inside
the water and other lies only inside the coconut oil as shown
in figure 1.
fig-1 Hot waterCoconut
oilThermometer
Lid
Free distribution by A.P. Government 5Now observe the readings of the two thermometers. The reading of
the thermometer kept in water decreases, while, at the same time, the
reading of the thermometer kept in oil increases.
•Why does this happen?
Because the average kinetic energy of the molecules of oil increases,
while the average kinetic energy of the molecules of water decreases. In
other words, the temperature of oil increases while the temperature of
water decreases.
•Can you say that the water loses energy?From the above discussion it is clear that, water loses energy while oil
gains energy; because of the temperature difference between the water
and oil. Thus some heat energy flows from water to oil. This means, the
kinetic energy of the molecules of the water decreases while the kinetic
energy of the molecules of oil increases.
•Can you now differentiate between heat and temperature based on the
discussion we made of the above activities?
With activities 2, 3 and 4 we can differentiate heat and temperature as
follows:
Heat is the energy that flows from a hotter to a colder body. Temperature
is a quantity that denotes which body is hotter and which is colder. So
temperature determines direction of heat (energy) flow , whereas heat is
the energy that flows.
Specific Heat
Activity 5
Take a large jar with water and heat it up to 80oC.Take two identical
boiling test tubes with single-holed corks. One of them is filled with 50g
of water and the other with 50g of oil, both at room temperature. Insert
two thermometers through holes of the
corks, one each into two test tubes. Now
clamp them to a retort stand and place them
in a jar of hot water as shown in figure 2.
Observe the readings of thermometers
every three minutes .Note the readings in
your notebook.
•In which test tube does the temperature
rise quickly?
fig-2Hot water
at 80oCWater atroomtemperatureOil atroomtemperature
Heat 6 X Class•Are the amounts of heat given to the water and oil same? How can you
assume this?
We believe that the same amount of heat is supplied to water and oil
because they are kept in the jar of hot water for the same interval of
time.
We observe that the rate of rise in temperature of the oil is higher than
that of the rise in temperature of the water.
•Why does this happen?
We conclude that the rate of rise in temperature depends on the nature
of the substance.
Activity 6
Take 250 ml of water in one beaker (a small beaker) and 1 litre of
water in another beaker (a larger beaker), and note down their initial
temperature using a thermometer (initial temperatures should be the same).
Now heat both beakers till the temperature of water in the two beakers
rises to 60 0C. Note down the heating times required to raise the
temperature of water to 60 0C in each beaker.
•Which beaker needed more time?
You will notice that you need more time to raise the temperature of
water in the larger beaker when compared to water in the small beaker.
That means you need to supply more heat energy to water in a larger beaker
(greater quantity of water) than water in a small beaker for same change intemperature.
For same change in temperature the amount of heat (Q) absorbed by a
substance is directly proportional to its mass (m)
@Q ∝ m   ( when ΔT is constant ) ……………..(1)
Now take 1 litre of water in a beaker and heat it over a constant flame.
Note the temperature changes ( ΔT ) for every two minutes.
•What do you notice?
You will notice that the change in temperature rise with time is constant,
that means, for the same mass (m) of water the change in temperature is
proportional to amount of heat (Q) absorbed by it.
@Q ∝ΔT     ( when ‘m’ is constant ) …………….(2)
From equation (1) and (2), we get
Q ∝mΔT      @   Q = mS ΔT
Where ‘s’ is a constant for a given substance. This constant is called
“specific heat” of the substance.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 7              Q
                   S =    ––––                        m ΔT
The specific heat of a substance is the
amount of heat required to raise the
temperature of unit mass of the substanceby one unit.
•How much heat energy is required to
raise the temperature of unit mass of
substance by 1°C ?
CGS unit of specific heat is cal/g-
oC
and SI unit of it is J / kg - K
1 cal/g- oC  = 1 kcal /kg-K
  = 4.2 x 103J/kg-K
We have seen that the rise in temperature depends on the nature of the
substance; hence the specific heat of a substance depends on its nature. If
the specific heat is high, the rate of rise (or fall) in temperature is low for
same quantity of heat supplied.  It gives us an idea of the degree of‘reluctance’ of a substance to change its temperature.
•Why is the specific heat different for different substances?Let us find out.
We know that the temperature of a body is directly proportional to the
average kinetic energy of particles of the body.The molecules of the system
(body or substance) have different forms of energies such as linear kineticenergy, rotational kinetic energy, vibrational energy and potential energy
between molecules. The total energy of the system is called internal
energy  of the system. When we supply heat energy to the system the heat
energy given to it will be shared by the molecules among the various formsof energy.
This sharing will vary from substance to substance. The rise in
temperature is high for a substance, if the maximum share of heat energy
is utilised for increasing its linear kinetic energy. This sharing of heatenergy of the system also varies with temperature .That is why the specific
heat is different for different substances.
If we know the specific heat of a substance, we can determine how
much heat (Q) is needed to raise the temperature of a certain mass of the
substance through certain degrees by using the equation Q = mS ΔTSubstance       Specific heat
In cal/g-oC In  J/kg-K
Lead 0.031 130
Mercury 0.033 139
Brass 0.092 380
Zinc 0.093 391
Copper 0.095 399
Iron 0.115 483
Glass(flint) 0.12 504
Aluminum 0.21 882
Kerosene oil 0.50 2100
Ice 0.50 2100
Water 1 4180
Sea water 0.95 3900
Heat 8 X ClassApplications of Specific heat capacity
1. The sun delivers a large amount of energy to the Earth daily. The
water sources on Earth, particularly the oceans, absorb this energy for
maintaining a relatively constant temperature. The oceans behave like heat
“store houses” for the earth. They can absorb large amounts of heat at the
equator without appreciable rise in temperature due to high specific heat
of water.. Therefore, oceans moderate the surrounding temperature near
the equator. Ocean water transports the heat away from the equator to areas
closer to the north and south poles. This transported heat helps moderate
the climates in parts of the Earth that are far from the equator .
2.  Water melon brought out from the refrigerator retains its coolness
for a longer time than any other fruit because it contains a large percentage
of water. (water has greater specific heat).
3.  A samosa appears to be cool outside but it is hot when we eat it
because the curry inside the samosa contains ingredients with higher
specific heats.
Method of mixtures
Activity - 7
 Situation – 1: Take two beakers of the same size and pour 200 ml of
water in each of them. Now heat the water in both beakers till they attain
the same temperature. If you pour this water from these two beakers into
a larger beaker, what temperature could you expect the mixture to be?
Measure the temperature of the mixture.
•What do you observe?
•What could be the reason for the fact you observed?Situation – 2: Now heat the water in one beaker to 90
oC and the other
to 60oC . Mix the water from these beakers in a larger beaker.
•What will the temperature of the mixture be?
•Measure temperature of the mixture. What did you notice?
•Can you give reasons for the change in temperature?Situation – 3: Now take 100 ml of water at 90
oC and 200 ml of water
at 60oC and mix the two.
•What is the temperature of the mixture?
•What difference do you notice in the change of temperature?
Let us find out.
Let the initial temperatures of the samples of masses m1 and m2 be T1
and T2 (the higher of the two temperatures is called T1, the lower is called
T2). Let T be the final temperature of the mixture.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 9The temperature of the mixture is lower than the temperature of the
hotter sample but higher than the temperature of the colder sample. This
means that the hot sample has lost heat, and the cold sample has gainedheat.
The amount of heat lost by the hotter sample Q
1 is m1S(T1- T).
The amount of heat gained by the cooler sample Q2 is m2S(T - T2).
Since heat lost by the hotter sample is equal to the heat gained by the
cooler sample (assuming no loss of heat) i.e  Q1 = Q2
which can be written as m1S(T1 - T) = m2S(T - T2)
which can be simplified to        T = (m1T1 + m2T2)/(m1 + m2)
You will notice the temperatures of mixtures in situation – 2 and
situation – 3 are not equal.
•Can you guess the reason for this?
•Can we find temperature of the mixture using a thermometer?
Principle of method of mixtures
When two or more bodies at different temperatures are brought into
thermal contact, then net heat lost by the hot bodies is equal to net heat
gained by the cold bodies until they attain thermal equilibrium. (If heat isnot lost by any other process)
Net heat lost= Net heat gain
This is known as principle of method of mixtures.
Determination of Specific heat of a solid
Aim: To find the specific heat of given solid.
     Material required: calorimeter, thermometer, stirrer, water, steam
heater, wooden box and lead shots.
Procedure: Measure the mass of the calorimeter along with stirrer.
Mass of the calorimeter, m1 = ........................
      Now fill one third of the volume of calorimeter with water. Measure
its mass and its temperature.Mass of the calorimeter plus water, m
2 = .................
Mass of the water, m2–m1 =
Temperature of water in calorimeter, T1 = ...........
Note: Calorimeter and water are at same temperature.Lab Activity 1

Heat 10 X ClassTake a few lead shots and place them in hot water or steam heater.
Heat them upto a temperature 100oC. Let this temperature be T2.
Transfer the hot lead shots quickly into the calorimeter (with minimum
loss of heat). You will notice that the mixture settles to a certain temperature
after some time.
Measure this temperature T3 and mass of the calorimeter along with
contents (water and lead shots).
Mass of the calorimeter along with contents, m3 = .........
Mass of the lead shots, m3 – m2 = ............
Since there is no loss of heat to surroundings, we can assume that the
entire heat lost by the solid (lead shots) is transferred to the calorimeter
and water to reach the final temperature.
Let the specific heats of the calorimeter, lead shots and water be Sc, Sl
and Sw respectively. According to the method of mixtures, we know;
Heat lost by the solid = Heat gain by the calorimeter + Heat gain by the water
(m3- m2 ) Sl(T2-T3)  =  m1 Sc(T3-T1)+(m2-m1) Sw(T3-T1)
            [m1Sc+(m2-m1)Sw] (T3-T1)
Sl =  ––––––––––––––––––––––––          (m3-m2)(T2-T3)
Knowing the specific heats of calorimeter and water, we can calculate
the specific heat of the solid (lead shots).
Evaporation
When wet clothes dry, you will notice that water in the clothes
disappears.
•Where does the water go?
Similarly, when the floor of a room is washed with water, the water on
the floor disappears within minutes and the floor becomes dry.
•Why does water on the floor disappear after some time?
Let us see.
Activity 8
Take a few drops of spirit on your palm using a droper.
•Why does your skin become colder?
Take a few drops of spirit (say 1 ml) in two petri dishes (a shallow
glass or plastic cylindrical lidded dish used in the laboratory) separately.
Keep one of the dishes containing spirit under a ceiling fan and switch on
the fan . Keep another dish with its lid closed. Observe the quantity ofspirit in both dishes after 5 minutes.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 11•What do you notice?
You will notice that spirit in the dish that is kept under the ceiling fan
disappears, where as you will find some spirit left in the dish that is kept in
the lidded dish.
•What could be the reason for this change?
To answer the above questions, you need to understand the process of
evaporation. The molecules of spirit that is kept in petri dish, continuously
move with random speeds in various directions. As a result these molecules
collide with other molecules.
During the collision they transfer energy to other molecules. When
the molecules inside the liquid collide with molecules at the surface, themolecules at the surface acquire energy and may fly off from the surface.
Some of these escaping molecules may be directed back into liquid
when they collide with the particles of air. If the number of escaping
molecules is greater than the number returned, then the number of
molecules in the liquid decreases. Thus when a liquid is exposed to air, themolecules at the surface keep on escaping from the surface till the entire
liquid disappears into air. This process is called evaporation.
During the process of evaporation, the energy of the molecules inside
the liquid decreases and they slow down. They transfer this energy to
escaping molecules during the collisions.
“The process of escaping of molecules from the surface of a liquid at
any temperature is called evaporation”
Let us determine the reason for faster evaporation of spirit kept under
the fan. If air is blown over the liquid surface in an open pan or perti dish,the number of molecules returned is reduced to a large extent. This is
because any molecule escaping from the surface is blown away from the
vicinity of the liquid. This increases the rate of evaporation. This is thereason why the spirit in petri dish, that is kept under ceiling fan evaporates
quickly when compared to that kept closed. You will notice that clothes
dry faster when a wind is blowing.
It means that the temperature of a system falls during evaporation.
Evaporation is a surface phenomenon.
We can also define evaporation as “the change of phase from liquid to
gas that occurs at the surface of the liquid”. It is a cooling process, because
the particles of liquid continuously give up their energy to the particles
that are escaping from the surface.
Heat 12 X ClassLet us look at the following example.
•Why do we sweat while doing work?
When we do work, we spend our energy mostly in the form of heat
energy from the body. As a result the temperature of the skin becomes
higher and the water in the sweat glands starts evaporating. This evaporation
cools the body.
Rate of evaporation of a liquid depends on its surface area, temperature
and amount of vapour already present in the surrounding air.
•Does the reverse process of evaporation take place?
•When and how does it take place?
Let us find out.
Condensation
Activity 9
Place a glass tumbler on the table. Pour cold water up to half its height.
•What do you observe on the outer surface of the tumbler?
•Why do water droplets form on the outer side of the glass?
We know that the temperature of surrounding air is higher than the
temperature of the cold water.
Air contains water molecules in the form of vapour.
When the molecules of water in air, during their motion, strike the
surface of the glass tumbler which is cool; they lose their kinetic energy
which lowers their temperature and they get converted into droplets.
The energy lost by the water molecules in air is gained by the molecules
of the glass tumbler.  Hence the average kinetic energy of the glass
molecules increases. In turn the energy is transferred from glass molecules
to the water molecules in the glass.
In this way, the average kinetic energy of water molecules in the
tumbler rises. Hence we can conclude that the temperature of the water inglass increases. This process is called ‘ condensation’ . It is a warming
process.
Condensation can also be defined as “the phase change from gas to
liquid”.
Let us examine a situation:
You feel warm after you finish your bath under the shower on a hot
day. In the bathroom, the number of vapour molecules per unit volume is
Free distribution by A.P. Government 13greater than the number of vapour molecules per unit volume outside the
bathroom. When you try to dry yourself with a towel, the vapour molecules
surrounding you condense on your skin and this condensation makes youfeel warm.
Humidity
Some vapour is always present in air. This vapour may come from
evaporation of water from the surfaces of rivers, lakes, ponds and fromthe drying of wet clothes, sweat and so on. The presence of vapourmolecules in air is said to make the atmosphere humid. The amount of
water vapour present in air is called humidity .
Dew and Fog
In early morning, during winter, you might have noticed that water
droplets form on window panes, flowers, grass etc.
•How are these water droplets formed?
Let us find out.
During winter nights, the atmospheric temperature goes down. The
surfaces of window-panes, flower, grass etc, become still colder. The air
near them becomes saturated with vapour and condensation begins. Thewater droplets condensed on such surfaces are known as dew.
If the temperature falls further, the whole atmosphere in that region
contains a large amount of vapour. So the water molecules present in vapour
condense on the dust particles in air and form small droplets of water.
These droplets keep floating in the air and form a thick mist which restrictsvisibility. This thick mist is called fog.
•Does the temperature of the water rise continuously if heat is suppliedto it continuously?
Boiling
Activity 10
Take a beaker of water, keep it on the burner .Note the readings of
thermometer for every 2 minutes.
•Did you see any rise or fall in the level of the surface of the water, in
the beaker? Why?
•Does the temperature rise continuously?
•When does the rise in temperature of water stop?
You will notice that, the temperature of the water rises continuously,
till it reaches 100°C. Beyond 100°C no further rise of temperature of
Heat 14 X Classwater is seen. At 100 0C, though supply of heat continues, the temperature
does not increase further. We also observe a lot of bubbling at the surface
of water at 1000C. This is what we call boiling  of water
•Why does this happen?
Water is a solution, there are many impurities dissolved in it including
some gases. When water or any liquid is heated, the solubility of gases it
contains reduces. As a result, bubbles of gas are formed in the liquid (atthe bottom and on walls of the vessel). Evaporation of water molecules
from the surrounding causes these bubbles, to become filled with saturated
vapour, whose pressure increases as we increase the temperature of theliquid by heating. At a certain temperature, the pressure of the saturated
vapour inside the bubbles becomes equal to the pressure exerted on the
bubbles from the outside (this pressure is equal to the atmosphericpressure plus the pressure of the layer of water above the bubble). As a
result, these bubbles rise rapidly to the surface and collapse at the surface
releasing vapour present in bubbles into air at the surface. This process ofconverting the liquid into vapour (gas) continues as long as you supply
heat. This appears as boiling of water for us.
“Boiling is a process in which the liquid phase changes to gaseous
phase at a constant temperature at a given pressure.”  This temperature is
called boiling point of the liquid.
•Are the processes of evaporation and boiling the same?
As you have seen in activity – 8 and 10, the boiling of a liquid differs
essentially from evaporation. Note that evaporation takes place at any
temperature, while boiling occurs at a definite temperature called theboiling point. Let us recall your observation in activity – 10 that, when
boiling process starts, the temperature of the liquid cannot be raised further,
no matter how long we continue to heat it. The temperature remains constant
at the boiling point until all of the liquid has boiled away.
In activity – 10, you have noticed that, while heating the water in the
beaker, the temperature of water rises continuously till it reaches 100 
0C.
But once boiling got started, no further rise of temperature is seen though
supply of heat continues.
•Where does the heat energy supplied go?
This heat energy is used to change the state of water from liquid to
vapour (gas). This is called latent heat of vapourization.
The heat energy required to change 1gm of liquid to gas at constant
temperature is called latent heat of vapourization.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 15Consider a liquid of mass ‘m’ that requires heat energy of ‘Q’ calories
to change from its state from liquid phase to gas phase. Then Latent heat
of vaporization  is Q/m. Latent heat of vaporization is denoted by ‘ L’.
CGS unit of latent heat of vaporization is cal/gm and SI unit is J/kg.
The boiling point of water at constant atmospheric pressure (1atm) is
100°C or 373K and Latent heat of vaporization of water is 540 cal/gm.
Let us now consider the transformation of ice into water.
•Why does an ice cube get converted into water?
Melting
Activity 11
Take small ice cubes in a beaker. Insert the thermometer into ice cubes
in the beaker. Observe the reading of the thermometer. Now start heating
the beaker keeping it on a burner. Observe changes in the thermometer
reading every 1 minute till the ice completely melts and gets converted
into water.
•What changes do you notice in the reading of thermometer as time
passes by?
•Does the temperature of the ice change during the process of melting?
You will observe that the temperature of ice at the beginning is equal
to or below 0oC. If the temperature of ice is below  0oC, it goes on changing
till it reaches 00C. When ice starts melting, you will notice no change in
temperature though you are supplying heat continuously.
•Why does this happen?
The heat energy supplied to the ice increases the internal energy of
the molecules of the ice. This increase in internal energy of molecules
weakens the bonds as well as breaks the bonds between the molecules
(H2O) in the ice. That is why the ice (in solid phase) becomes water (in
liquid phase).This process takes place at a constant temperature 0°C or
273K. This temperature is called melting point.  This process of converting
solid into a liquid is called “ Melting ”.
The temperature of the ice does not change during melting because
the heat energy given to the ice is totally utilized in breaking the bonds
between the water molecules.
The process in which solid phase changes to liquid phase at a constant
temperature is called melting. This constant temperature is called melting
point.
Heat 16 X Class•How much heat energy is required to convert 1gm of ice to liquid?
The Heat energy required to convert 1gm of solid completely into
liquid at a constant temperature is called Latent heat of fusion.
Consider a solid of mass m. Let heat energy Q be required to change it
from the solid phase to liquid phase. The heat required to change 1gm of
solid into liquid is Q/m.
Latent heat of fusion L = Q/m. The value of Latent heat of fusion of
ice is 80cal/gm
Freezing
You might have observed coconut oil and ghee getting converted from
liquid state to solid state during winter season.
•What could be the reason for this change?
•What happens to water kept in a refrigerator?
•How does it get converted from liquid phase to solid phase?
We know that the water that is kept in a refrigerator converts to solid
ice. You know that initial temperature of water is more compared to the
temperature of ice. It means that during the process of conversion fromliquid to solid, the internal energy of the water decreases so that it becomesa solid ice. This process is called freezing.
“The process in which the a substance in liquid phase changes to solid
phase by losing  some of its energy is called freezing .”
Freezing of water takes place at 0°C temperature and at one
atmospheric pressure.
•Are the volumes of water and ice formed with same amount of water
equal? Why?
Let us find out.
Activity 12
Take small glass bottle with a tight lid .Fill it with water completely
without any gaps and fix the lid tightly in such a way that water does not
come out of it. Put the bottle into the deep freezer of a refrigerator for a
few hours. Take it out from the fridge and you will observe that the glass
bottle breaks.
•Why did the glass bottle break?
Free distribution by A.P. Government 17•If two different systems, A and B, (thermal contact) are in thermal equilibrium individually with
another system C, then the systems A and B are in thermal equilibrium with each other.
•The average kinetic energy of the molecules is directly proportional to the absolute temperature.
•The specific heat of a substance is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of unitmass of the substance by one unit.
S=Q/m
Δt
•The process of escaping of molecules from the surface of a liquid at any temperature is called
evaporation and it is a cooling process.
•Condensation is the reverse process of evaporation.
•Boiling is the process in which the liquid phase changes to gaseous phase at a constant temperatureand constant pressure.
1. What would be the final temperature of a mixture of 50g of water at 20
oC temperature and 50g
of  water at 40oC temperature? (AS1)
2. Explain why dogs pant during hot summer days using the concept of evaporation? (AS1)
3. Why do we get dew on the surface of a cold soft drink bottle kept in open air? (AS1)
4. Write the differences between evaporation and boiling? (AS1)Improve your learning
Key words
Temperature, Heat, Thermal equilibrium, Specific heat, Evaporation,
Condensation, Humidity, Dew, Fog, Boiling, Latent heat of vaporization,
Melting, Freezing.
What we have learnt
We know that the volume of the water poured into the glass bottle is
equal to the volume of the bottle. When the water freezes to ice, the bottle
is broken .This means that the volume of the ice should be greater than the
volume of the water filled in the bottle.
In short, we say that water ‘expands’ (increases in volume) on freezing!
Thus the density of ice is less than that of water and this explains why
ice floats on water.
Heat 18 X Class5. Does the surrounding air become warm or cool when vapour phase of H2O condenses? Explain.
6. Answer these. (AS1)
a) How much energy is transferred when 1gm of boiling water at 100oC condenses to water at
100oC?
b) How much energy is transferred when 1gm of boiling water at 100oC cools to water at 0oC?
c) How much energy is released or obsorbed when 1gm of water at 0oC freezes to ice at 0oC?
d) How much energy is released or obsorbed when 1gm of steam at 100oC turns to ice at 0oC?
7. Explain the procedure of finding specific heat of solid experimentally. (AS1)
8. Covert 20oC into Kelvin scale.(AS1)
9. Your friend is asked to differentiate between evaporation and boiling. What questions could
you ask to make him to know the differences between evaporation and boiling? (AS2)
10. What happens to the water when wet clothes dry? (AS3)
11. Equal amounts of water are kept in a cap and in a dish. Which will evaporate faster? Why?
(AS3)
12. Suggest an experiment to prove that the rate of evaporation of a liquid depends on its surface
area and vapour already present in surrounding air. (AS3)
13. Place a Pyrex funnel with its mouth-down in a sauce pan full of water, in such a way that the
stem tube of the funnel is above the water or pointing upward into air. Rest the edge of the
bottom portion of the funnel on a nail or on a coin so that water can get under it. Place the pan
on a stove and heat it till it begins to boil. Where do the bubbles form first? Why? Can you
explain how a geyser works using this experience. (AS4)
14. Collect information about working of geyser and prepare a report. (AS4)
15. Assume that heat is being supplied continuously to 2kg of ice at -5oC. You know that ice melts
at 0oC and boils at 100oC. Continue the heating till it starts boiling. Note the temperature every
minute. Draw a graph between temperature and time using the values you get. What do you
understand from the graph. Write the conclusions. (AS5)
16. How do you appreciate the role of the higher specific heat of water in stabilising atmospheric
temperature during winter and summer seasons? (AS6)
17. Suppose that 1 l of water is heated for a certain time to rise and its temperature by 2oC.  If 2 l of
water is heated for the same time, by how much will its temperature rise? (AS7)
18. What role does specific heat play in keeping a watermelon cool for a long time after removing
it from a fridge on a hot day? (AS7)
19. If you are chilly outside the shower stall, why do you feel warm after the bath if you stay in  the
bathroom? (AS7)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 191. The SI unit of specific heat is_____________
2. _____________ flows from a body at higher temperature to a body at lower temperature.
3. _____________ is a cooling process.4. An object ‘A’ at 10 
0C and another object ‘B’ at 10K are kept in contact, then heat will flow
from _________ to ___________.
5. The latent heat of fusion of ice is _____________.
6. Temperature of a body is directly proportional to _____________.
7. According to the principle of method of mixtures, the net heat lost by the hot bodies is equal to
_____________ by the cold bodies.
8. The sultryness in summer days is due to _____________.
9. ____________ is used as a coolant.
10. Ice floats on water because _____________.
1. Which of the following is a warming process [     ]
a) Evaporation b) condensation c) boiling d) all the above
2. Melting is a process in which solid phase changes to [     ]
a) liquid phase b) liquid phase at constant temperature
c) gaseous phase d) any phase
3. Three bodies A, B and C are in thermal equilibrium. The temperature of B is 45oC. then the
temperature of C is ___________ [    ]
a) 45oC b) 50oC c) 40oC d) any temperature
4. The temperature of a steel rod is 330K. Its temperature in oC is ________ [    ]
a) 55oC b) 57oC c) 59oC d) 53oC
5. Specific heat S = [    ]
a) Q/ Δt b) Q Δt c) Q/m Δt d) m Δt/Q
6. Boiling point of water at normal atmospheric pressure is _________ [    ]
a) 0oC b) 100oC c) 110oC d) -5oC
7. When ice melts, its temperature [    ]
a) remains constant b) increases
c) decreases d) cannot sayMultiple choice questionsFill in the blanks
Chemical reactions and Equations 20 X ClassIn lower class you studied about temporary, permanent , natural, man
made changes etc. They may be categorized into two types known as
physical changes and chemical changes. In this chapter we discuss aboutthe chemical changes and express them in the form of chemical equations.
Consider the following processes and think about the reactions taking
place during the occurance of these processes.
- coal is burnt.
- food gets digested in our body.
- iron nail is exposed to humid atmosphere for a longtime.
- we respire.- milk is converted into curd.
- water is added to quicklime.
- crackers are burnt.
•What changes do you notice?
•Are they physical changes or chemical changes?
•Are they temporary changes or permanent changes?In all the above processes, the nature of original substance would be
changed. If new substances are formed with properties completely unlike
those of the original substances, we say a chemical change has taken place.
•How do we know a chemical reaction has taken place?Let us perform some activities to know this.Chemical Reactions
and Equations2Chapter

Free distribution by A.P. Government 21Activity 1
Take about 1 g of quick lime (calcium oxide) in a beaker. Add 10 ml of
water to this. Touch the beaker with your finger.
•What do you notice?
Do you notice that the beaker is hot when you touch it. The reason is
that the calcium oxide (quick lime) reacts with water and in that process
heat energy is released. Calcium oxide dissolves in water producing
colourless solution. Test the nature of solution with litmus paper.
•What is the nature of the solution?
A red litmus paper turns blue when dipped in the above solution. This
solution is a basic solution.
          Activity  2
Take about  100 ml of water in a beaker and dissolve
a small quantity of sodium sulphate (Na2SO4).
Take about 100ml of water in another beaker and
dissolve a small quantity of barium chloride (BaCl2),
observe the colours of the solutions obtained.
•What are the colours of the above solutions?
•Can you name the solutions obtained?
Add Na2SO4 solution to BaC l2 solution and observe.
•Do you observe any change on mixing these
solutions?
Activity  3
fig-1:Formation of barium
sulphate precipitateNa2SO4
BaCl2
Take a few zinc granules in a conical flask.
Add about 5 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid to
the conical flask.
Observe the changes in the conical flask.
•What changes do you notice?
Now keep a burning match stick near the
mouth of the conical flask.•What happens to burning match stick?
•Touch the bottom of the conical flask with
your fingers. What do you notice?
•Is there any change in temperature?
From the above activities you can conclude
that during a chemical change: fig-2:Formation of hydrogen gas by action
of dilute HCl on zinc and testing of H2 gasGlass tube
Conical plask
Dil. HC l
Zinc granulesH2 gas
Chemical reactions and Equations 22 X Class1. The original substances lose their characteristic properties. Hence
these may be products with different physical states and colours.
2. Chemical changes may be exothermic or endothermic i.e, they may
involve heat energy liberation or heat energy absorption.
3. They may form an insoluble substance known as precipitate.
4. There may be gas liberation in a chemical change.In our daily life we observe variety of changes taking place around us.
In this chapter we study various types of chemical reactions and their
symbolic representation.
Chemical Equations
In activity 1, when calcium oxide reacts with water a new substance is
formed which is unlike either calcium oxide or water. The description of
chemical reactions in a sentence in activity-1 is quite long. It can be written
in shorter form as a word equation.
The word equation of the above reaction is,
calcium oxide + water J calcium hydroxide  ......................... (1)
        (Reactants)                   (Product)
The substances which undergo chemical change in the reaction are
called reactants  and the new substances formed are called products.
A chemical reaction written in the form of word equation shows the
change of reactants to products by an arrow placed between them. The
reactants, are written on the left side of arrow and the final substances, or
products  are written on the right side of the arrow. The arrow head point
towards the product shows the direction of the reaction.
If there is more than one reactant or product involved in the reaction,
they are indicated with a plus (+) sign between them.
Writing a Chemical Equation
•Can you write a chemical reaction in any other shorter way other than
the way we discussed above?
Chemical equations can be made more precise and useful if we use
chemical formulae instead of words.
Generally, a compound is written by giving its chemical formula ,
which  lists the symbols of the constituent elements and uses the subscript
to indicate the number of atoms of each element present in the compound.
If no subscript is written the number 1 is understood. Thus we can write
Free distribution by A.P. Government 23calcium oxide as CaO, water as H2O and the compound formed by the
reaction of these two compounds is calcium hydroxide Ca (OH) 2.
Now the reaction of calcium oxide with water can be written as:
CaO + H2OJ Ca (OH)2      ............................ (2)
In the above chemical equation, count the number of atoms of each
element on left side and right side of arrow.
•Is the number of atoms of each element on both sides equal?
Observe the following reactions and their chemical equations. Zinc
metal reacts with dilute HC l to yield ZnC l2 and liberates Hydrogen gas.
Zn + HC lJ ZnCl2+H2    ............................ (3)
Sodium sulphate reacts with barium chloride to give white precipitate,
barium sulphate.
Na2SO4+ BaC l2    J BaSO4 + NaC l     ............................. (4)
•Do the atoms of each element on left side equal to the atoms of  the
element on the right side of the equation?
Balancing Chemical Equations
According to the law of conservation of mass, the total mass of the
products formed in chemical reaction must be equal to the mass of reactants
consumed. You know an atom is the smallest particle of an element that
takes part in a chemical reaction. It is the atom which accounts for the
mass of any substance. The number of atoms of each element before andafter reaction must be the same.
All the chemical equations must balance, because atoms are neither
created nor destroyed in chemical reactions. A chemical equation in which
the numbers of atoms of different elements on the reactants side (leftside) are same as those on product side (right side) is called a balanced
reaction .
Balancing a chemical equation involves finding out how many formula
units of each substance take part in the reaction. A formula unit , as the
name implies, is one unit – whether atom, ion, or molecule – corresponding
to a given formula. One formula unit of NaC l for example is one Na
+ ion
and one C l– ion; one formula unit of MgBr2 is one Mg2+ ion and two Br–
ions and one formula unit of  water is one H2O molecule.
Now let us balance the chemical equation using a systematic method.
Chemical reactions and Equations 24 X ClassFor this take the example of hydrogen reacting with oxygen to form water.
Step 1 : Write the equation with the correct chemical formulae for
each reactant and product.
Eg: In the reaction of hydrogen
with oxygen to yield water, you can
write chemical equations as follow:
H2 + O2  J      H2O       ……(5)
Step 2 : After writing the molecular
formulae of the substances the equationis to be balanced. For this we should not touch the ratio of atoms in the
molecules of the susbtances but we may put suitable numbers as thecoefficients before the formulae.
In the above equation put ‘2’ before the molecular formula of hydrogen
and also ‘2’ before the molecular formula of water. Observe whether atoms
of both the elements hydrogen and oxyen are same (or) different on both
the sides. They are in the same number on both sides. Therefore, the equationis balanced.
2H
2+O2J 2H2O …………..(6)
Step 3 : Sometimes there is a possibility that the coefficients of all the
substances getting divided with a suitable number. Since we require the
lowest ratio of coefficient for reactants and products the above operation
is to be done. If no common factor is there, there is no need to divide the
equation. The above equation needs no division of the coefficients of the
substances.
Step 4:  Verify the equation for the balancing of atoms on both sides of
the equations. The above equation (6) is a balanced equation.
Let us work out some more examples to see how equations are balanced.
Eg-1:   Combustion of propane (C3H8)
Propane, C 3 H8 is a colourless, odourless gas often used as a heating
and cooking fuel. Write the chemical equation for the combustion reaction
of propane. The reactants are propane and oxygen and the products arecarbon dioxide and water.
Write the reaction in terms of symbols and formulae of the substances
involved and follow the four steps described in previous discussion.
Step 1:  Write the unbalanced equation using correct chemical formulae
for all substances.
C
3H8    + O2    J     CO2     +    H2O ............(7), (Skeleton equation)Element No of atoms
LHS RHS
H2 2
O2 1
Free distribution by A.P. Government 25Element No of atoms
LHS RHS
C 3(inC3H8) 1 (inCO2)
H 8 (inC3H8) 2(inH2O)
O 2 (inO2) 3 (inCO2H2O)Note: Unbalanced chemical equation
containing molecular formulae of the
substances is known as skeleton equation.
Step 2:  Compare number of atoms of
each element on both sides.
Find the coefficients to balance the
equation. It is better to start with the most
complex substance – in this case C3H8. Look at the skeleton equation, and
note that there are 3 carbon atoms on the left side of the equation but only
1 on the right side. If we add a coefficient of 3 to CO2 on the right side the
carbon atoms balance.
C3H8+O2J 3CO2+   H2O ................... (8)
Now, look at the number of hydrogen atoms. There are 8 hydrogens
on the left but only 2 on the right side. By adding a coefficient of 4 to the
H2O on the right, the hydrogen atoms get balanced.
C3H8+O2J 3CO2+   4H2O  .................(9)
Finally, look at the number of oxygen atoms. There are 2 on the left
side but 10 on the right side, by adding a coefficient of 5 to the O2 on the
left, the oxygen atoms get balanced.
C3H8+5 O2J 3CO2+  4H2O .....................(10)
Step 3:  Make sure the coefficients are reduced to their smallest whole-
number values. In fact, the equation (10) is already with the coefficientsin smallest whole number. There is no need to reduce its coefficients, but
this might not be achieved in each chemical reaction.
Let us assume that you have got chemical equation as shown below:
2C
3H8+ 10O2J 6CO2+   8H2O ................... (11)
•Is it a balanced equation as per rules?
•How do you say?
Though the equation (11) is balanced, the coefficients are not the
smallest whole numbers. It would be necessary to divide all coefficients
of equation (11) by 2 to reach the final equation.
C3H8+5 O2J 3CO2+  4H2O ................... (12)
Step 4: Check the answer. Count the numbers and kinds of atoms on
both sides of the equation to make sure they are the same.
Eg-2:
Iron oxide reacts with aluminum to form iron and aluminum trioxide.
Write the chemical equation to show the reaction and balance it.
Chemical reactions and Equations 26 X ClassStep 1: Write the equation using the correct chemical symbols and
formulae for all the reactants and products.
Fe2O3+A l J  Fe +    Al2O3 ................. (13)
Step 2: Find the suitable coefficient for the reactants and products, to
equate the number of atoms of each element on both sides.
i. Examine the number of atoms of each element present in
equation (13) on both sides.
In the above equation (13), Number of oxygen atoms is equal on both
sides. We have to balance the remaining atoms.
ii. There are 2 Fe atoms on left side(on reactant side). There is one Fe
atom on right side(on products side). To equate number of Fe atoms,
multiply Fe by 2 on product side.
Now the partially balanced equation is:
Fe2O3+A l J  2Fe  + Al2O3 .................. (14)
iii. In the above equation(14) number of aluminum atoms still
unbalanced.
There is one ‘Al’ atom on left side and 2 ‘Al’ atoms on the right side
(in Al2O3), to balance ‘Al’ atoms on both sides multiply ‘Al’ by 2 on left
side of arrow mark.
Now the partially balanced equation:
Fe2O3+ 2Al J   2Fe    + Al2O3................ (15)
The above equation(15), the number of atoms of each element is same
on both sides of arrow mark. This is a balanced chemical equation.
Step 3 : The above equation(15) is  balanced and coefficients are also
smallest whole numbers.
Step4 : Finally to check the correctness of balanced equation, count
the number of atoms of each element on both sides of equation.
Fe2O3+ 2Al J    2Fe    + Al2O3................. (16)Elements No. of atoms in reactants No. of atoms in products
Fe 2  (in Fe2O3) 1  (in Fe)
O 3  (in Fe2O3) 3  (in Al2O3)
Al 1  (in Al) 2  (in Al2O3)
Elements No of Atoms of Reactants No. of Atoms in products
Fe 2 (in Fe2O3) 2(in Fe)
O 3 (in Fe2O3) 3(in Al2O3 )
Al 2 (in 2 Al) 2(in Al2O3 )
Free distribution by A.P. Government 27(Note: The above method of balancing is called trial and error method
only. Sometimes you may have to take more care to balance the equation.)
Making Chemical Equations more informative:
Chemical equations can be made more informative by expressing
following characteristics of the reactants and products.
i. Physical state
ii. Heat changes (exothermic or endothermic change)
iii.Gas evolved (if any)
iv. Precipitate formed (if any)
i. Expressing the physical state: To make the chemical equation
more informative, the physical states of the substances may be mentioned
along with their chemical formulae. The different states ie., gaseous, liquid,and solid states are represented by the notations (g), (l)  and (s) respectively.If the substance is present as a solution in water, the word ‘aqueous’ iswritten. In the short form it is written as (aq).
The balanced equation(16) is written along with the physical states as:
Fe
2O3(s) + 2Al(s)J  2Fe(s)   +   Al2O3 (s)  ...... (17) ; Δ represents heating.
ii. Expressing the heat changes: Heat is liberated in exothermic
reactions and heat is absorbed in endothermic reactions. See the following
examples.
1. C(s)  +  O2 (g)  J  CO2 (g)  + Q   (exothermic reaction)
2. N2 (g)  + O2 (g)  J 2NO (g)  -  Q   (endothermic reaction)
fig-3(b): Iron in solid state fig-3(a): Aluminium in solid stateΔ
Chemical reactions and Equations 28 X Class‘Q’ is heat energy which is shown with plus ‘+’ sign on product side
for exothermic reactions and minus ‘–’ sign on product side for endothermic
reactions.
iii. Expressing the gas evolved: If a gas is evolved in a reaction, it is
denoted by an upward arrow ‘ ’or (g)
Eg: Zn (s) + H2SO4 (aq)  J  ZnSO4 (aq)  +  H2 (g) 
iv. Expressing precipitate formed: If a precipitate is formed in the
reactions it is denoted by a downward arrow.
Eg: AgNO3 (aq)  +  NaC l (aq) J  AgC l(s)   + NaNO3 (aq)
Sometimes the reaction conditions such as temperature, pressure,
catalyst, etc are indicated above and/or below the arrow in the equation.
For example,
         sunlight
2AgC l(s)   –––––J 2 Ag (s) + Cl2(g)
       Sunlight
6CO2 (g)+ 6 H2O (l)     –––––JC6H12O6 (s) + 6O2 (g)      Chlorophyll        glucose
Interpreting a balanced chemical equation
i. A chemical equation gives information about the reactants and
products through their symbols and formulae.
ii. It gives the ratio of molecules of reactants and products.
iii. As molecular masses are expressed in ‘Unified Masses’ (U), the
relative masses of reactants and products are known from the equation.
iv. If the masses are expressed in grams then the equation also gives
the molar ratios of reactants and products.
v. If gases are involved, we can equate their masses to their volumes
and calculate the volumes or those gases liberated at given condition of
temperature and pressure using molar mass and molar volume relationship.
vi. Using molar mass and Avagadro’s number we can calculate the
number of molecules and atoms of different substances from the equation.
It gives information about relative masses of reactants and products.
from the equation we get,a) mass - mass relationship
b) mass - volume relationship
c) volume - volume relationshipd) mass - volume - number of molecules relationship etc.,
Free distribution by A.P. Government 29Eg-1: Al (s) + Fe2O3 (s)    J Al2O3 (s)  +   Fe (s)
(atomic masses of Al = 27U, Fe = 56U, and O = 16U)
2Al (s)        + Fe2O3 (s)       J Al2O3 (s)              +   2Fe (s) , is a balanced equation.
(2x27)U   + (2 x56+3 x16)U   J   (2x27+3 x16)U  +  (2 x56)U
54 U       +   160 U   J 102 U +  112 U
or 2 mol   +   1 mol   J 1 mol              +  2 mol
54 g       +   160 g   J 102 g +  112 g
Suppose that your are asked to calculate the amount of aluminium,
required to get 1120 kg of iron by the above reaction.
Solution: As per the balanced equation
Aluminium J Iron
54 g J 112 g
x? J (1120 x 1000)g
  (1120 x1000)g x 54 g∴x g = ––––––––––––––––––   112 g
           =  10000 x 54 g
     =  540000 g   or   540 kg
∴to get 1120 kg of iron we have to use 540 kg of aluminium.
Eg-2: Calculate the volume, mass and number of molecules of hydrogen
liberated when 230 g of sodium reacts with excess of water at STP.(atomic
masses of Na = 23U, O = 16U, and H = 1U)
The balanced equation for the above reaction is,
      2Na (s)+2 H2O (l)J 2NaOH (aq)+H2 (g)
(2x23)U +   2(2 x1+1x16)UJ 2(23+16+1)U + (2 x1)U
    46 U + 36 U J 80 U + 2 U
or 46 g +    36 g J 80 g + 2 g
Solution: As per the balanced equation:
46 g of Na gives 2g of hydrogen
230g of Na gives ______? g of hydrogen.
   230 g x 2g           –––––––––––   = 10g of hydrogen       46 g
1 gram molar mass of any gas at STP i.e, standard temperature 273K
and standard pressure 1 bar, occupies 22.4 litres known as gram molar
volume .
∴2.0g of hydrogen occupies 22.4 litres at STP.
10.0g of hydrogen occupies ........? litres at STP.
Chemical reactions and Equations 30 X Class     10.0g x 22.4 litres––––––––––––––––– = 112 litres
                2.0g
2 g of hydrogen i.e, 1 mole of H2 contains 6.02 x1023 (NO) molecules
10 g of hydrogen contain ....................?
     10.0g x 6.02 x1023 molecules–––––––––––––––––––––––––                        2.0g
= 30.10 x 10
23 molecules
= 3.01 x 1024 molecules
Types of chemical reactions
In chemical reactions atoms are neither created nor destroyed. A
chemical reaction is a process that is usually characterized by a chemical
change  in which the starting materials (reactants) are different from the
products. Chemical reactions occur with the formation and breaking
of chemical bonds . (you will learn about chemical bonding in chapter …)
Some common reaction types are discussed below.
Chemical Combination
Activity 4
(This activity needs Teacher’s assistance)
- Take a small piece (about 3 cm long) of magnesium ribbon.
- Rub the magnesium ribbon with sand paper.
- Hold it with a pair of tongs.
- Burn it with a spirit lamp or burner.
•What you observe?
You will notice that,
Magnesium burns in oxygen by producing dazzling
white flame and changes into white powder. The white
powder is magnesium oxide.
2Mg(s)+       O2 (g)J     2MgO (s)  ......... (18)
Magnesium             Oxygen         Magnesium oxide
In this reaction magnesium and oxygen combine to
form a new substance magnesium oxide. A reaction in
which single product is formed from two or more
reactants is known as chemical combination reaction .
You will also notice release of enormous amount
of  heat energy when magnesium is burnt in air.
fig-4: Burning of magnesium
ribbon
Free distribution by A.P. Government 31Let us discuss some more examples of combination reactions.
i. Burning of Coal: When coal is burnt in oxygen, carbon dioxide is
produced.
C (s)+ O2 (g)    JCO2 (g)+  Q   (heat energy)   .............(19)
ii. Slaked lime is prepared by adding water to quick lime.
Ca O (s)+ H20 (l)  J Ca (OH) 2 (aq)+   Q  (heat energy).....(20)
Large amount of heat energy is released on
reaction of water with CaO(s). If you touch the walls
of the container you will feel the hotness. Such
reactions are called exothermic  reactions.
A solution of slaked lime produced in the
reaction equation(20) is used to white wash the
walls. Calcium hydroxide reacts slowly with the
carbon dioxide in air to form a thin layer of calcium
carbonate on the walls. It gives a shiny finish to the
walls.
Ca (OH)2(aq)   +   CO2(g)J CaCO3(s)  +    H2O(l)
The chemical formula of marble is CaCO3
Decompostion Reaction
Activity 5
- Take a pinch of calcium carbonate (lime stone) in a boiling tube.
- Heat the boiling tube over the flame of spirit lamp or burner.
- Now bring a burning match stick near  the evolved gas as shown in
the figure.
- What do you observe?
You will notice that match stick would be put off.
fig-5: Formation of slaked
lime by the reaction of CaO
with waterBeaker
Water
CaO
fig-6: Heating of calcium carbonate and testing
the gas evolved with burning match stickStand
Bunsen
burnerClampDelivery tube
Boiling tube
Calcium carbonate
Burning match stickPutoff match stick
Chemical reactions and Equations 32 X ClassIn the above activity, on heating calcium carbonate decomposes to
calcium oxide and carbon dioxide.
     Heat
CaCO3 (s)–––––J CaO(s)    +    CO2 (g) .................. (21)
Lime stone                                  quick lime
It is a thermal decomposition reaction. When a decomposition reaction
is carried out by heating, it is called thermal decomposition reaction .
Activity 6
- Take about 0.5g of lead nitrate powder in a
boiling test tube.
- Hold the boiling tube with a test tube holder.
- Heat the boiling tube over a flame. (see
figure)
- Note down the change.
- What do you observe?
Heating of lead nitrate and emission of
nitrogen dioxide
On heating lead nitrate decomposes to
lead oxide, oxygen and nitrogen dioxide. You
observe the brown fumes liberating in the boiling tube. These brown fumes
are of nitrogen dioxide (NO2).
Heat
2Pb (NO3)2(s)   –––––J  2PbO(s)  +   4NO2 (g)     +  O2 (g)  ........ (22)
Lead Nitrate     lead oxide          Nitrogen dioxide       Oxygen
This is also a thermal decomposition reaction.
Let us perform some more decomposition reactions
Activity 7
- Take a plastic mug. Drill two holes at its base.
- Fit two  ‘one holed rubber stoppers’ in these holes.
- Insert two carbon electrodes in these rubber stoppers.- Connect the electrodes to 9V battery as shown in fig.- Fill the mug with water, so that the electrodes are immersed.- Add few drops of dilute sulphuric acid to water.
- Take two test tubes filled with water and invert them over the two carbon
electrodes.
-
Switch on the current and leave the apparatus undisturbed for some time.
•What do you observe in the test tubes?
fig-7:Heating of lead nitrate and
emission of nitrogen dioxideStandClamp
Delivery tube
NO2Gas
collectingjarLead nitrate
Boiling
tube
Bunsen
burner
Free distribution by A.P. Government 33
You will notice the liberation of gas
bubbles at both the electrodes. These
bubbles displace the water in the test
tubes.
Is the volume of gas collected in
both the test tubes same?
Once the test tubes are filled with
gases take them out carefully. Test both
the gases separately by bringing aburning candle near the mouth of each
test tube.
•What do you observe in each case?
Can you predict the gas present in each test tube?In the above activity on passing the electricity, water dissociates to
hydrogen and oxygen.
      Electrolysis
2H2O (l)    –––––J 2 H2 (g) + O2 (g)...................... (23)
Activity 8
- Take some quantity of silver bromide on a watch glass.
- Observe the colour of silver bromide.
- Place the watch glass in sunlight for some time.
- Now observe the colour of silver bromide.
•What changes do you notice?
•Did the colour of the silver bromide change?
Silver bromide decomposes to silver and bromine in sunlight. Light
yellow  coloured silver bromide turns to gray due to sunlight.
fig-8: Electrolysis of waterO2 H2
+–Anode Cathode
9 V
batteryPlastic mug
Test tubes
SwitchGraphite rodsAcidified
water
fig-9(a): Silver bromide
(light yellow colour)fig-9(b) when exposed to sunlight
(gray colour) silver metal
Chemical reactions and Equations 34 X Class                    sunlight
2AgBr(s)–––––J 2 Ag (s) + Br2 (g)............................ (24)
This decomposition reaction occurs in presence of sunlight and such
reactions are called photochemical reactions .
All the above decomposition reactions require energy in the form of
heat, light or electricity for converting the reactants to products. All these
reactions are endothermic.
Carry out the following Activities:
i) Take a pinch of AgC l2 in a watch glass. Keep it in sunlight for some
time and observe the change.
ii) Take some ferrous sulphate crystals in a boiling tube. Heat it over
spirit lamp.
iii) T ake about 2 gm of barium hydroxide in a test tube. Add about 1 gm of
ammonium chloride and mix with glass rod. Touch the test tube with
your palm.
What do you observe?
Displacement reaction.
In displacement reaction one element displaces another element from
its compound and takes its place there in.
Displacement of hydrogen from acids by metals:Generally metals which are more active than hydrogen displace it from
an acid.
Let us observe the reaction in following activity.
Activity 9
- Take a small quantity of zinc dust in a conical flask.
- Add dilute hydrochloric acid slowly.
- Now take a balloon and tie it to the mouth of the conical flask.
- Closely observe the changes in the conical flask and balloon.
- What do you notice?
You can see the gas bubbles coming out from the solution and the
balloon bulges out (figure 10b).  Zinc pieces react with dilute hydrochloric
acid and liberate hydrogen gas as shown below.
Zn (s)+ 2HC l (aq)J ZnCl2(aq ) + H2 (g)..........................(25)
In reaction (25) the element zinc has displaced hydrogen from
hydrochloric acid. This is displacement reaction.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 35
Activity 10
- Take two iron nails and clean them by rubbing with sand paper.
- Take two test tubes and mark them as A and B.
- Take about 10ml of copper sulphate solution in each test tube. Dip
one iron nail in copper sulphate solution of test tube A and keep it
undisturbed for 20 minutes.
- Keep the other iron nail aside.
- Now take out the iron nail from copper sulphate solution and
compare with the other iron nail that has been kept aside. (see fig11-a)
- Compare the colours of the solutions in the test tubes.
(see fig11-b)
- What changes do you observe?You will find the iron nail dipped in copper sulphate solution becoming
brown. The blue colour of copper sulphate solution in test tube ‘A’ fades.
fig-10(a)fig-10(b)Dil. HC l
Conical flask
Zinc dustConical flask
Zinc dustBalloon
with H2
gas
Dil. HC l
fig-11(a):Iron nail dipped in
copper sulphate solutionfig-11(b): Iron nail and copper
sulphate solutions compared before
and after the experiment
A
B
Chemical reactions and Equations 36 X ClassThe chemical reaction in this activity is:
Fe (s)    +     CuSO4 (aq)J  FeSO4 (aq)  +  Cu (s)    ...............(26)
 Iron is more reactive than copper, so it displaces copper from copper
sulphate. This is another example of displacement reaction.
Other examples of displacement reaction are:i)   Zn
(s)   +   2AgNO3 (aq)  J Zn (NO3)2 (aq)  +  2 Ag (s)  ............ (27)
ii)  Pb (s)  +   CuC l2 (aq)  J PbCl2 (aq)  +  Cu (s).................. (28)
Double displacement reaction
Activity 11
- Take a pinch of lead nitrate and
dissolve in 5.0ml of distilled waterin a test tube.
- Take a pinch of potassium iodide
in a test tube and dissolve in
distilled water.
- Mix lead nitrate solution with
potassium iodide solution.
- What do you observe?
A yellow coloured substance
which is insoluble in water, is
formed as precipitate . The
precipitate is lead iodide.
 Pb (NO
3) 2(aq)  +   2KI (aq)    JPbI2 (s)  +  2KNO3 (aq)..................(29)
lead nitrate potassium Iodide lead iodide     potassium nitrate
This reaction is double displacement reaction. If two reactants exchange
their constituents chemically and form two products, then the reaction is
called as double displacement reaction.
Other examples of double displacement reactions are:
1) Sodium sulphate solution on mixing with barium chloride solution
forms a white prepitate of barium sulphate and soluble sodium chloride.
Na2SO4 (aq) + BaC l2 (aq) J BaSO4(s) + 2 NaC l (aq)...........................(30)
fig-12: formation of lead iodide
and potassium nitratePb(NO3)2
KI
Lead IodideKNO3
Free distribution by A.P. Government 37
2) Sodium hydroxide reacts with hydrochloric acid to form sodium
chloride and water.
NaOH (aq)+ HC l(aq) J  NaC l(aq) + H2O(l)         ............................(31)
3) Sodium chloride spontaneously combines with silver nitrate in
solution giving silver chloride precipitate.
NaCl (aq)+ AgNO3(aq) J AgC l(s) + NaNO3(aq)............................(32)
Oxidation and Reduction
‘Oxidation’ is a reaction that involves the addition of oxygen or removal
of hydrogen.
‘Reduction’ is a reaction that involves the addition of hydrogen or
removal of oxygen.
Let us try to understand more clearly doing this experiment.
Activity 12
- Take about 1.0g of copper powder in a china dish.
- Keep the china dish on a tripod stand containing wire gauge.
- Heat it with a bunsen burner or with a spirit lamp.
- Do you find any change in colour of copper?
You will notice that the surface layer of copper becomes black.
•Why does the colour of copper change?
•What is the black colour product formed on the surface of copper?In the activity on heating copper it reacts  with
oxygen present in the atmosphere to form copper
oxide.
The reaction is shown below.
       
HeatCu(s)     +   O2(g)   –––––J  2 CuO(S)  ........(33)
fig-13(b)
China dishfig-13(a): Black
copper oxide
fig-13(c): Oxidation of copper to copper oxideChind dish
containing
Copper
powderWire gauze
Tripod
standBunsen
burner
Chemical reactions and Equations 38 X ClassHere copper combines with oxygen to form copper oxide. Here oxygen
is gained and the process is called oxidation .
Now pass hydrogen gas over hot copper oxide obtained in above activity
and observe the change.
•What do you notice?
•Is there any change in black colour of copper oxide?
You will notice that the black coating on copper turns brown because
copper oxide loses oxygen to form copper. In this process oxygen is lost
and the process is called Reduction .
           Heat
CuO(s)    +   H2(g)    –––––JCu(s)    +    H2O (g)
In the above reaction hydrogen is gained; such reaction is called
reduction reaction .
Generally oxidation and reduction occur in the same reaction. If one
reactant gets oxidized, the other gets reduced. Such reactions are calledoxidation-reduction reactions or redox reactions .
In the CuO, H
2 reaction CuO is reduced and H2 is oxidized.
Some other examples of redox reactions are:
i) 2 Fe2O3(s)   +   3C(s)  J   4 Fe (s)   +   3CO2 (g).............. (34)
ii) 2 PbO (3)    + C(s) J   2Pb(s)    +   CO2 (g).............. (35)
Have you observe the effects of oxidation reactions in daily life
Corrosion:
You must have observed that a freshly cut apple turns brown after some
time. The shining iron articles gradually become reddish brown when left
for some time. Burning of crackers produce dazzling light with white
fumes.fig-14: Reduction of copper oxide to copper
H2 gas H2O(g)
Bunsen
burnerStandGlass tubeBlack copper oxide Cork
Free distribution by A.P. Government 39•How do these changes occur?
They are all the examples of the process called oxidation.
Let us know how?
Oxidation is the reaction of oxygen
molecules with different substances
starting from metal to living tissue which
may come in contact with it. 
Apples pears, bananas, potatoes etc.,
contain  enzyme called polyphenol
oxidase or tyrosinase, which reacts with
oxygen and changes the colour on the cut
surface of the fruit.
The browning of iron, when left for
sometime in moist air, is a process
commonly known as rusting of iron. This
process is basically oxidation reaction which requires both oxygen andwater. Rusting does not occur in oxygen free water or dry air.
Burning of crackers is also oxidation process of variety of chemicals.
•Did you notice the colour coating on silver and copper articles?
When some metals are exposed to moisture, acids etc., they tarnish
due to the formation of respective metal oxide on their surface. This process
is called corrosion .
Look at the following examples:
i. The black coatings on silver(see fig-16)
4Ag    +   2H
2S     +   O2  J   2Ag2S   + 2H2O .............. (37)
black
fig-15: Rusting of iron
fig-16: Tarnishing
of silverware
(before & after)
Chemical reactions and Equations 40 X Class
Do you know?
Gold one of the most valuable of elements has been prized since antiquity for
its beauty and resistance to corrosion.ii. Green coating on copper (see fig-17)
2Cu    +    O2     J 2CuO .............. (38)
Corrosion is the oxidative deterioration of a metal.
Corrosion causes damage to car bodies, bridges, iron railings, ships
etc., and to all other objects that are made of metals. Especially corrosion
of iron is a serious problem.
Corrosion can be prevented or at least minimized by shielding the
metal surface from oxygen and moisture. It can be prevented by painting,
oiling, greasing, galvanizing, chrome plating or making alloys. Galvanizing
is a method of protecting iron from rusting by coating them a thin layer ofZinc.
Alloying is also a very good method of improving properties of metal.
Generally pure form of iron is very soft and stretches easily when hot.
Iron is mixed with carbon, nickel and chromium to get an alloy stainlesssteel. The stainless steel is hard and does not rust.
A metallic substance made by mixing and fusing two or more metals,
or a metal and a nonmetal, to obtain desirable qualities such as hardness,lightness, and strength is known as alloy .
 For example: Brass, bronze, and steel.
fig-17: Corrosion of copper
Free distribution by A.P. Government 41Key words
Reactants, products, exothermic reaction, endothermic reaction, chemical
combination, chemical decomposition, displacement reaction, double
displacement reaction, oxidation, reduction, corrosion, rancidity, antioxidants.Some more effects of oxidation on everyday life
•Combustion is the most common example for oxidation reactions.
For example: burning of wood involves release of carbon dioxide, water
vapour along with huge amount of energy.
•Rising of dough with yeast depends on oxidation of sugars to carbon
dioxide and water.
•Bleaching of coloured objects using moist chlorine
Cl2  +  H2O  J  HOC l  +  HC l .............. (39)
        HOC l   J  HCl  +   (O) .............. (40)
Coloured object + (O) J  Colourless object.
Some times during rainy season the power supply to our home from
the electric pole will be interrupted due to formation of the metal oxide
layer on the electric wire. This metal oxide is an electrical insulator. On
removing the metal oxide layer formed on the wire with a sand paper, supply
of electricity can be restored.
Rancidity
•Have you ever tasted or smelt the fat/oil containing food materials
left for a long time?
•When fats and oils are oxidized they become rancid. Their smell and
taste change.
Thus we can say that oxidation reactions in food material that were
left for a long period are  responsible for spoiling of food.
Rancidity is an oxidation reaction.
•How can we prevent the spoiling of food?
The spoilage of food can be prevented by adding preservatives like
Vitamin C and Vitamin E.
Usually substances which prevent oxidation (Antioxidants) are added
to food containing fats and oil. Keeping food in air tight containers helps
to slow down oxidation process.
Do you know that  manufacturers of potato chips flush bags of chips
with nitrogen gas to prevent the chips from getting oxidized.
Chemical reactions and Equations 42 X Class•Chemical change is permanent change.
•A Chemical equation represents a chemical reaction.
•Complete chemical equation represents the reactants, products and their physical state.
•A Chemical equation is said to be balanced, when the number of atoms of each element is same
on both reactants side and products side.
•A chemical equation must always be balanced.
•In a combination reaction two or more substances combine to form a new single substance.
•In a decomposition reaction a single substance decomposes to give two or more substances.
•Reactions in which heat energy is absorbed by the reactants are endothermic reactions.
•In exothermic reaction heat energy is released by the reactants.
•A displacement reaction occurs, when an element displaces another element from its compound.
•Two different atoms or ions are exchanged in double displacement reactions.
•Oxidation is the gain of Oxygen or loss of Hydrogen.
•Loss of oxygen or gain of Hydrogen is Reduction.
•Corrosion causes damage to iron appliances.
•When fats and oils are oxidized, they become rancid.
•Precipitate is an insoluble substance.
1. What is a balanced chemical equation? Why should chemical equations be balanced? (AS1)
2. Balance the following chemical equations. (AS1)
a) NaOH   +   H2SO4      J   Na2SO4   +   H2O
b) Hg (NO3)2  +   KI    J Hg I2  +  KNO3
c) H2   +   O2  J H2O
d) KC lO3     J KCl    +   O2
e) C3H8    +   O2  J CO2   +   H2O
3. Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions. (AS1)
a) Zinc + Silver nitrate J Zinc nitrate + Silver.
b) Aluminum + copper chloride J Aluminum chloride + Copper.
c) Hydrogen + Chlorine. J Hydrogen chloride.
d) Ammonium nitrate J Nitrogen + Carbon dioxide + water.
4. Write the balanced chemical equation for the following and indentify the type of reaction in each
case. (AS1)a) Calcium hydroxide 
(aq) + Nitric acid (aq) J Water (l) + Calcium nitrate (aq)What we have learnt
Improve your learning

Free distribution by A.P. Government 43b) Magnesium (s) + Iodine (g) J Magnesium Iodide. (s)
c) Magnesium(s) +  Hydrochloric acid(aq) J Magnesium chloride(aq) +  Hydrogen(g)
d) Zinc(s) + Calcium chloride (aq) J Zinc Chloride (aq)  +  Ca(s)
5. Write an equation for decomposition reaction where energy is supplied in the form of
Heat / light / electricity. (AS1)
6. What do you mean by precipitation reaction? (AS1)
7. How chemical displacement reactions differ from chemical decomposition reaction? Explain
with an example for each. (AS1)
8. Name the reactions taking place in the presence of sunlight?  (AS1)9. Why does respiration considered as an exothermic reaction? Explain. (AS1)
10. What is the difference between displacement and double displacement reactions? Write equations
for these reactions? (AS1)
11. MnO
2   +  4HC l  J  MnCl2  +  2H2O   +   C l2
In the above equation, name the compound which is oxidized and which is reduced?  (AS1)
12. Give two examples for oxidation-reduction reaction. (AS1)
13. In the refining of silver, the recovery of silver from silver nitrate solution involved displacement
by copper metal. Write the reaction involved.  (AS1)
14. What do you mean by corrosion? How can you prevent it?  (AS1)
15. Explain rancidity. (AS1)
16. Balance the following chemical equations including the physical states. (AS1)
a) C6H12O6–––––J    C2H5OH + CO2
b) Fe +   O2–––––J Fe2O3
c) NH3+   C l2–––––J N2H4+NH4Cl
d) Na +    H2O –––––J NaOH +H2
17. Balance the chemical equation by including the physical  states of the substances for the following
reactions. (AS1)
a) Barium chloride and sodium sulphate aqueous solutions react to give insoluble Barium
sulphate and aqueous solution of sodium chloride.
b) Sodium hydroxide reacts with hydrochloric acid to produce sodium chloride and water.c) Zinc pieces react with dilute hydrochloric acid to liberate hydrogen gas and  forms zinc
chloride
18. A shiny brown coloured element ‘X’ o n heating in air becomes black in colour. Can you
predict the element ‘X’ and the black coloured substance formed? How do you support your
predictions? (AS2)
19. Why do we apply paint on iron articles?  (AS7)
20. What is the use of keeping food in air tight containers?  (AS7)
Chemical reactions and Equations 44 X ClassFill in the blanks
1. The decomposition of vegetable into compost is an example of ____________ reaction.
2. The chemical reactions in which energy is absorbed to form a new compound is called ________3. The reaction 2N
2O J 2N2 + O2 is an example for ________ reaction.
4. The reaction Ca + 2H2O J Ca(OH)2  +  H2 is an example for _______ reaction.
5. The substances that are present on left side of a chemical equation  are called _____.6. The arrow mark between the products and reactants of a chemical equation shows ______ of
the reaction.
7.Match the following:1) 2AgNO
3 + Na2CrO4 J Ag2CrO4+ 2NaNO3(     ) a) combination reactions
2) 2 NH3 J N2+ 3H2(     ) b) decomposition reactions
3) C2H4 + H2O J C2H6O (     ) c) displacement reactions
4) Fe2O3 + 3CO J2 F2+ 3CO2(     ) d) double displacement Reactions
1. Fe2O3 + 2Al J Al2O3 + 2 Fe. [ ]
       The above reaction is an example of:
a) Combination reaction b) Decomposition reaction
c) Displacement reaction d) Double decomposition reaction
2. What happens when dil. hydrochloric acid is added to iron filings? Choose the correct answer.
a) Hydrogen gas and iron chloride are produced. [ ]b) Chlorine gas and iron hydroxide are produced.
c) No reaction takes place.d) Iron salt and water are produced.
3. 2 PbO
(s)  +  C (s) J 2Pb(s)  +   CO2 (g)[]
Which of the following statements are correct for the above chemical reaction?a) Lead is reduced b) Carbon dioxide is oxidized
c) Carbon is oxidized d) Lead oxide is reduced.
i) (a) and (b) ii) (a) and (c) iii) (a), (b) and (c) iv) all.
4. The chemical equation BaC l
2 + Na2SO4 J BaSO4  + 2NaC l represents following type of
chemical reaction. [ ]
       i) displacement ii) combination
iii) decomposition iv) double-displacement
5. The reaction of formation hydrogen chloride from hydrogen and chloride represents following
type of chemical reaction [ ]i) decomposition ii) displacement
iii) combination iv) double-displacementMultiple choice questions
Free distribution by A.P. Government 45In class 6, we have learnt about shadows and we carried out many
experiments with light rays and also discussed the rectilinear propagation
of light i.e., light travels in a straight line. In class 7 we learnt the laws ofreflection.
Let us recall some of them.
−A source of light, an opaque object and a screen are needed to form a
shadow.
−Light travels in a straight line.
−When light gets reflected from a surface, the angle of reflection is
equal to the angle of incidence.
−The incident ray, the normal at the point of incidence and the reflectedray all lie in the same plane.
You must have observed shadows and images in your daily life. Sme
questions might have come to your mind while observing these shadows
or images.
•Why does our image appear thin or bulged out in some mirrors?
•Why is there right-left inversion (lateral inversion) when we look into
a mirror?
•Can we focus sunlight at a point using a mirror instead of a magnifyingglass?
•Why is the angle of reflection equal to the angle of incidence when alight ray gets reflected from a surface?
•Are the angle of reflection and angle of incidence also equal forreflection by curved surfaces?Reflection of light by
different surfaces3Chapter

Reflection of Light by Different Surfaces 46 X ClassIn this lesson we are going to learn about reflection of light in detail
so that we can answer the above questions. Let’s start with some activities
based on your previous knowledge.
Activity 1
Formation of image by a pinhole camera
Recall how an image forms in a pinhole camera that you have learnt in
class 6. Draw a ray diagram of the formation of an image in a pinholecamera.
What whould happen if we increase the size of
the hole of the pinhole camera. Observe the flame of
a candle with a pinhole camera making a big hole. Try
to draw a ray diagram of the formation of an image in
a pinhole camera with a big hole. Look at figure 1.
By observing the figure we can understand that the
light rays coming from the top of the candle flame fall at different points
on the screen. Similarly the rays coming from bottom of the candle flame
also fall at different points on the screen. Thus we get blurred image on
the screen due to the big hole of the camera as shown figure 1.
Now think about reflection of light, and solve the task given below.
Activity  2
A smart crow is on a tree at point ‘A’ as shown in figure-2. Some grains
are on the ground. If the crow wants to take a grain and reach the point ‘B’
on the other tree as early as possible(in least time), from where should
the crow pick up the grain?fig-1
Think and discuss
•Does the explanation match your observation?
•What happens if the hole is much bigger i.e. equal to the size of the flame?
•If so, can we get an image of a flame on the screen of the pinhole camera?
Why?
•What happens if we observe the same flame with the same pinhole camera
from a long distance?
Think and answer. Do the experiment and check your answer.

Free distribution by A.P. Government 47
GWith the mathematical knowledge you have
about angles and triangles can you guess the path
that the crow selects? If you can’t, read the
following.
The crow can pick the grain from any point on the ground but the
condition is;  selecting  a point on the ground to reach point ‘B’ from point
‘A’ in least possible time. If we assume that the speed of the crow is constant
the path that the crow selects should be the shortest. Let us find the shortest
path.
Observe some of the paths in figure-3.
Which among the paths ACB, ADB, AEB and
AFB is the shortest path?
To compare the lengths of these paths, we
make duplicates of them as shown in
figure-4.
 In the figure, CB = CG.  The length of path
ACB = AC+CB = AC+CG = ACG. Thus thelength of the path ACG is equal to the length of
the path ACB.  similarly ,
length of the path ADB = length of the path ADG
length of the path AEB = length of the path AEGlength of the path AFB = length of the path AFG
If you observe Fig-4 carefully, you will
notice that, among the paths ACG, ADG, AEG
and AFG, the shortest path is AEG, because itis the straight line distance between points A
and G. You can measure and check this using a scale.  As AEG=AEB, path
AEB is the shortest path to reach point B from point A. It would take theleast time. So the smart crow will pick the grain from point E.
Observe the path AEB once again in figure-5.
If we draw a normal EE
I at point E, we can easily find that angle AEEI
(angle 1) is equal to angle EIEB (angle 2).
Like the crow in the above situation, light also selects the path which
takes the least time to travel. This principle was first given by Pierre de
Fermat , a French lawyer and an amateur mathematician.
It is also applicable to reflection of light. When light gets reflected
from a surface, it selects the path that takes the least time. That is why the
fig-2AB
A
B
C DE F
fig-4
AB
CDE F
fig-3
A
fig-5B
21E I
E
Reflection of Light by Different Surfaces 48 X Classangle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection as shown in figure-5.
Now, before a detailed discussion on reflection, perform a fun activity
and refresh your previous knowledge.
Activity 3
Check your understanding of reflection
Look at figures 6a and 6b. Let us suppose that you have been given a
plane mirror strip.
•What will you do to obtain figures that are shown in figure 6(b) using
mirror strip and figure 6(a)?
Place the plane mirror strip on the figure shown in 6(a) in such a manner
that you see one of the figures shown in figure-6b. The procedure is shown
in figure-6c.
•Are you able to obtain all figures shown in 6(b)?
Take the help of your friends to complete the task.
Let us begin the detailed discussion on reflection of light by plane
surfaces.
Reflection of light by plane mirrors
Aim: Verification of laws of reflection
Required material: mirror strip, drawing board, white paper, pins,
clamps, scale and pencil
Procedure:  Take a drawing board and fix a white paper on it with the
help of clamps. Draw a straight line AB at the centre of the paper and alsofig-6a
fig-6bfig-6c
Mirror
Lab Activity 1

Free distribution by A.P. Government 49a normal (ON) to AB at the point ‘O’. Draw a straight
line PQ making certain angle (angle i) with ON as
shown in figure 7. Fix two pins at the points P and Qon the paper vertically. Observe the image P
I of the
pin P and QI of the pin Q, in the mirror kept along
the line AB. Fix two more pins R and S such thatthey are in the same line as that of P
I and QI. Join R,
S and O as shown in figure-7.
Measure the angle between RS and ON
(angle of reflection). You will find that angle
of incidence = angle of reflection. Repeat theexperiment for different angles of incidence and measure the corresponding
angles of reflection (r).
•Is the angle of reflection equal to the angle of incidence in all cases ?
In which plane does the incident ray, reflected ray and the normal lie
(2
nd law of reflection of light) ?  Let us discuss this.
Plane of reflection
In the above activity, the incident ray is the ray which passes through
the points P and Q touching the paper. The reflected ray is the ray which
passes through the points R and S touching the same paper, and ON is thenormal to the mirror at point O.
•Do the two rays and the normal lie in the same plane? If yes, which is
that plane?
If the incident ray, reflected ray and normal are in the plane parallel to
the plane of the paper, where will that plane be?
Assume that the heads of all pins pierced at points P,Q,R and S in the
above activity are at the same height. The incident ray is the ray which
passes through the heads of pins which are located at points P and Q, and
reflected ray is the ray which passes through the heads of pins which arelocated at points R and S.
•Where will the normal be?
•In which plane will the incident ray, reflected ray and the normal lie?
The plane in which the incident ray, reflected ray and normal lie is the
plane of reflection .
Assume that the heads of the pins which are located at the points P and
Q are not of the same height.•How will the incident ray be?
•How will the reflected ray be?
P1
A B
PQ1
Q
NSRO
i r
fig-7
Reflection of Light by Different Surfaces 50 X Class•How will the normal be?
•How will the plane of reflection be?
Arrange two pins with different heights. Arrange the incident ray,
reflected ray and the normal with the help of spokes of a cycle. Then think
of the plane of reflection.
•How does a mirror form the image of a pin or any object?
Let us discuss.
Formation of an image by a plane mirror
Observe figure 8.
O is a point object. Some rays from O reach
the mirror and get reflected. When we look into
the mirror, the reflected rays seem to be coming
from the point I. So point I is the image of point
object O.
Observe the distances of object O and image I
from the surface of the mirror and try to compare
these distances by approximate estimation in figure
8. We find that these distances are equal.
Let us assume that an object (OOI) is kept in
front of a mirror as shown in figure 9. Draw a few
incident rays from the object to the mirror and
reflected rays from the mirror using laws of
reflection. Your drawing may look like that shown
in figure 9.
In the figure, the rays coming from the point O
get reflected from the mirror and seem to be coming
from the point I. So we say I is the image of O.
The rays coming from the point OI get reflected from the mirror and
seem to be coming from the point II. So we say II is the image of OI.
The rays coming from the middle part of the O and OI will form their
own images between I and II.
Thus, III is the image of the object OOI.
•What is the size of the image compared to the size of the object?
Let us discuss some of the characteristics like size, distance and right-
left inversion of an image formed by a plane mirror.
fig-8O I
fig-9O
OII
II
Free distribution by A.P. Government 51
2
OCharacteristics of an image formed by a plane mirror
Take an object, say pen or pencil. Put it in front of a plane mirror,
touching the surface of the mirror.
•What do you say about the size of the image compared to the size of
the object?
Move the object towards your eye. What do you observe?
•Is the size of the image decreasing or increasing?Figure 9 shows the formation of an image by a plane mirror. In that
figure, you might have noticed that the size of the image is equal to the size
of the object. Why  does the size of the image seem to be decreased when
you move the object towards your eye?
To understand this see figure 10, which
shows how our eyes judge the size of an object.
Observers 1 and 2 are looking at the object
which is at point O. It looks smaller to observer
2 than to observer 1, because the light rays
coming from the object make a smaller angle at the eye of observer 2 who
is at a larger distance compared to observer 1. The angle plays a role in
judging the size of the object.
In the same way when we move the object from the mirror to our eye,
the image in the mirror seems to move back in the mirror. Then the distancefrom the image to our eye increases. The angle made by image at our eye
is smaller than the angle made by the object. That is why the image looks
smaller than the object.
When you stand in front of a mirror you might have observed that the
distance of your image in a plane mirror seems to be equal to the distance
between the mirror and yourself. What you observe is generally true. You
can verify this by observing figure-9.
You also might have observed the right-left inversion of your image in
a plane mirror.
•    Why does an image suffer lateral (right-left) inversion?
See figure-11.
•    What do you understand from the figure 11?
The light rays which come from our right ear get reflected from
the plane mirror and reach our eye. Our brain feels that the ray
(reflected ray) is coming from the inside of the mirror (shown by
dotted line in the figure-11). That is why our right ear looks like leftear in the image.
fig-111
fig-10
Reflection of Light by Different Surfaces 52 X ClassNow observe the lateral inversion of a letter
with a ray diagram in figure-12.
Think of the process of image formation by
a plane mirror and explain lateral inversion by
observing figure-12.
We now know how light reflects from plane
surfaces. In class 7, we learnt about spherical
mirrors and why they were called spherical mirrors.
We already did a simple activity to get an image with a concave mirror
in class 7. Now we shall study the reflection of light by curved surfaces in
detail.
Reflection of light by spherical mirrors
The first law of reflection tells us;
A light ray incident at an angle with the normal at the point of incidence
will get reflected making equal angle with the normal.
This law is true for all surfaces, be it a plane surface or a curved one.
The important words here are ‘the angle made with normal at the point of
incidence’. If for any surface one can decide the normal and find the incident
angle, it is possible to deduce the angle made by the reflected ray. It is very
easy to find a normal at any point on the plane surface but for a curved oruneven surface it is not straightforward.
Activity 4
Finding the normal to a curved surface
Take a small piece of thin foam or rubber (like the sole of a slipper).
Put some pins along a straight line on the foam as shown in the figure -13a.
All these pins are perpendicular to the plane of foam. If the foam is
considered as a mirror, each pin would represent the normal at that point.Any ray incident at the point where the pin makes contact with the surface
will reflect with the same angle as the incident ray made with the pin-
normal.
fig-12
fig-13(a) fig-13(b) fig-13(c)

Free distribution by A.P. Government 53Now bend the foam piece inwards as shown in figure-13b, what happens
to the pins?
They still represent the normal at various points, but you will notice
that all the pins tend to converge at a point (or intersect at a point).
If we bend the foam piece outwards, we will see that the  pins seem to
move away from each other or in other words they diverge as shown in
figure-13c.
This gives us an idea of what is likely to happen with a spherical mirror.
A concave mirror will be like the rubber sole bent inwards (fig-13b) and
the convex mirror will be like the rubber sole bent out wards (fig-13c).
For a concave mirror, like these pins in figure-13b, all normals will
converge towards a point. This point is called centre of curvature(C) of
the mirror.
This gives us a clue about how we can find normal to any point on a
spherical mirror. All that we have to do is to draw a line from the point onthe mirror to centre of the sphere.
It is much easier to imagine this in a two dimensional figure as shown
in figure-14a. The concave mirror is actually a part of a big sphere. Inorder to find this centre point (centre of curvature) we have to think of the
centre of the sphere to which the concave mirror
belongs. The line drawn from C to any point on themirror gives the normal at that point.
For the ray R, the incident angle is the angle it
makes with the normal shown as i and the reflected
angle is shown as r in figure-14b. We know by first
law of reflection i  = r.
The mid point (Geometrical centre) of the mirror
is called pole (P) of the mirror. The horizontal line
shown in the figures which passes through the centre
of curvature and pole is called principal axis of the
mirror. The distance between P and C is radius of
curvature (R) of the mirror. Recall a little bit of geometry: while learning about circles
and tangents, you may have learnt that a radius is always
perpendicular to the tangent to the circle drawn at the point.
PCNormal
C(pole)principal axis
PiRfig-14(a)
fig-14(b)r
Reflection of Light by Different Surfaces 54 X ClassUsing the construction method described above, try to construct
different reflected rays for any array of rays that are parallel to the principal
axis. What is your conclusion?
Verifying your drawing with experiments
To verify this we must first find out some way of obtaining a beam of
parallel rays. How do we do that?
First we need to create a situation in which one gets parallel rays of
light.
In the figure-15 we have stuck two pins on a
thermocole block. The pins are parallel to each other.
As we see in the figure, when a source of light is
kept very near, we see the shadows diverging (from
the base of the pins). As we move the source away
from the pins, the angle of divergence gets reduced.
If we move the source far away we will get parallel
shadows. But as we move the candle away, the light intensity becomes low.That means to get a beam of parallel rays the source should be at a long
distance  and it must be of sufficient intensity.
Where do we find one such source?
Yes, we have one easily available source, you probably have guessed
it:  The Sun.
Let us do an experiment with sun rays and a concave mirror.
Activity  5
Hold a concave mirror such that sunlight falls on
it. Take a small paper and slowly move it in front of
the mirror and find out the point where you get thesmallest and brightest spot, which will be the image
of the sun. (See to it that your paper is small so that it
does not obstruct the incoming sun rays.)
The rays coming from the sun parallel to the
principal axis of concave mirror converge to a point (see figure-16). This
point is called Focus or focal point (F) of the concave mirror. Measure
the distance of this spot from the pole of the mirror. This distance is thefocal length (f) of the mirror. The radius of curvature will be twice this
distance (R=2f).
Does this  help you to verify the conclusions  you arrived at, with your
drawing?
fig-15
fig-16CF P
Free distribution by A.P. Government 55•What happens if you hold the paper at a distance shorter than the focal
length from the mirror and move it away?
•Does the image of the sun become smaller or bigger?
You will notice that the image of the sun first keeps on becoming small,
beyond the focal point it keeps on becoming enlarged.
Note: while drawing a ray diagram sometimes it is not clear which is
the reflecting side of the mirror. Hence we follow a convention of showing
lines on the non-reflecting side(coated side).
Can you draw the same diagram for a convex
mirror?
See figure-17. The parallel rays appear to diverge
after reflection. If we extend the reflected rays
backwards they meet at ‘F’ i.e. focus of the convex
mirror.
When parallel rays are incident on a concave mirror, on reflection they
meet at the focus.
•Do we get an image with a concave mirror at the focus every time? Let
us find out.
Aim: Observing the types of images and measuring the object distance
and image distance from the mirror.
Material required: A candle, paper, concave mirror (known focal
length), V-stand, measuring tape or meter scale.
Procedure:  Place the concave mirror on V-stand, a candle and meter
scale as shown in figure-18.
Keep the candle at different distances from the mirror (10cm to 80cm)
along the axis and by moving the paper (screen) find the position whereThink and discuss
•See figure-17. A set of parallel rays are falling on a convex mirror. What
conclusions can you draw from this?
•Will you get a point image if you place a paper at the focal point?
fig-17F P C
Lab Activity 2

Reflection of Light by Different Surfaces 56 X Classyou get the sharp image on paper. (Take care that flame is above the axis of
mirror, paper is below the axis).
Note down your observations in table-1.
Table-1
Group your observations based on the type of image you see (e.g. Image
is bigger and inverted). It is possible you may not get any image at some
positions, note down that too!
Since we know the focal point and centre of curvature, we can reclassify
our above observations as shown in table-2. What do you infer from this
table?.
At this point we suggest that you make one more observation. You
have been trying to get the image on a paper when the object is at different
positions. At the same time also look into the mirror and note yourobservations about how the image appears.
•Is it inverted or erect, enlarged or diminished?
Table - 2
Observation
no.Distance of candle
from mirror
(object distance-u)Distance of paper
from mirror
(image distance-v)Enlarged/
diminishedInverted or
erect
1
2
3
4
Position of the
candle (object)Enlarged/
diminishedInverted or
erectPosition of
the image
Between mirror & F
At focal point
Between F and C
At centre of curvature
Beyond CReal or
virtualfig-18
Free distribution by A.P. Government 57What do you infer from the table-2?
Let us try to draw ray diagrams with concave mirrors and compare
them with your inferences.
Ray diagrams for concave mirror
In activity-5 we saw the ray diagram of sunrays parallel to the concave
mirror and the image of the sun was very small at the focal point (See
figure-16). Now we shall develop a technique to draw ray diagrams whenan object is placed anywhere on the axis of the mirror and validate the
above observations.
Here we will take at least two rays originating from the same point on
the object but with different direction, see how they get reflected from the
mirror and find out the point where they meet to form the image.
Let us take an example.
As shown in the figure-19, assume a concave mirror
and a candle placed at some distance along the axis of the
mirror.
The diagram shows two rays coming from the tip of
the flame (object).   The reflected rays are constructedbased on the laws of reflection.They meet at point A. The
tip of the flame of the reflected image will be at the point
of intersection, A.
•    Why only at point A?
If we hold the screen at any point before or beyond point A (for example
at point B), we see that the rays will meet the screen at different points.
Therefore, the image of the tip of the flame will be formed at differentpoints due to these rays. If we draw more rays emanating from the same tip
we will see that at point A they will meet but at point B they won’t. So, the
image of the tip of the flame will be sharp if we hold the screen at point A
and will become blurred (due to overlaping of multiple images) when we
move the paper slightly in any direction (forward or backward). Is this not
something that you observed during the previous experiment with sun rays?
However, it is not going to be easy to evaluate the angle of reflection
for any arbitrary ray, every time we will have to find the normal, measurethe incident angle and construct a ray with equal angle on the other side.
This would be a tedious task, can we find any other simpler method?
Yes, there are a few. Based on our discussion so far, we can identify
some appropriate rays which we can take as representative rays to find the
point ‘A’.
AB
fig-19
Reflection of Light by Different Surfaces 58 X ClassWe have seen that all rays that are parallel to the
axis get reflected such that they pass through the focal
point of the mirror. So, for drawing any diagram themost suitable ray to draw will be the one that comes
from the object and goes parallel to the axis of the
mirror. The reflected ray will be the line drawn from
the point of incidence on the mirror and passes
through the focal point of the mirror. To make it more convenient we willalways take rays that come from the tip of the object. See the ray R
1 in
figure-20.
The converse situation of previous one is also true; that is, a ray that
passes through the focal point of the mirror will travel
parallel to the axis after reflection.
This gives us our second ray. This will be the ray
coming from the tip of the flame and going through
the focal point and falling on the mirror. Afterreflection, this ray travels parallel to the axis. So we
draw the reflected ray as a line parallel to the axis
coming from the point where the incident ray meetsthe mirror. See R
2 in figure-21.
Using the  rays R1, R2 and finding the point where they intersect we
know the point where the image of  the tip is formed.
There is one more ray which is convenient to draw.
We have seen earlier that any ray that is normal to the surface, on
reflection, will travel along the same path but in the opposite direction.
Which ray can such a one be for a spherical mirror?
We know that a line drawn from the centre of
curvature to the mirror is perpendicular to the tangent
at the point where the line meets the curve. So if we
draw a ray coming from the tip of the object goingthrough the centre of curvature to meet the mirror, it
will get reflected along the same line. This ray is shown
as R
3 in the figure-22. In general, a ray travelling along normal retraces its
path.
Along with these three rays ‘the ray which comes from the object and
reaches the pole of the mirror’ is also useful in drawing ray diagrams. For
this ray, the principal axis is the normal.
FCR1
fig-20P
fig-21F CR2
P
fig-22R3
FC P
Free distribution by A.P. Government 59If we have our object (candle) placed as shown
in figure-23, we can draw the ray diagram to get the
point of intersection A, of any two rays coming fromthe top of the object and point of intersection B, of
any two rays coming from the botom of the object.
We notice that point B is exactly at the same distance
from mirror as point A.  Hence the image is vertical
and inverted.
• Where is the base of the candle expected to be in the image when the
candle is placed on the axis of the mirror?
Since any ray coming from any point on the axis and travelling along
the axis will get reflected on the axis itself, we can conclude that the base
of the image is going to be on the axis. Using the knowledge, that if theobject is placed vertically on the axis, the image is going to be vertical, all
that we do is to draw a perpendicular from point A
to the axis. The intersection point is the point wherethe base of the image of the candle is likely to be
formed. See figure-24. Hence, as shown in the
diagram the image will be inverted and diminished.
Figure-24 is drawn for the case where the object
is placed beyond the centre of curvature.
Does this conclusion match with your
observations? (Lab Activity 2)
Draw similar diagrams for other cases and verify that they match with
your observations.
•During the experiment, did you get any positions where you could not
get an image on the screen?
Consider the case shown in the figure-25. The
candle object (O) is placed at a distance less than the
focal length of the mirror.
The first ray (R
1) will start from tip of the object
and run parallel to axis to get reflected so as to pass
through the focal point. This one is easy to draw. The
second ray that we chose for earlier ray diagrams is
the ray coming from the tip of the object and going through the focal point
but it is not possible as such a ray will not meet the mirror. So we must use
the third ray, a ray coming from the tip of the object and going through the
centre of curvature.
fig-23R1
R2
FCB
P
fig-24R1
R2
C FP
AA
fig-25R1
F C OP
Reflection of Light by Different Surfaces 60 X ClassBut that too does not seem to be possible. So we make a small change.
Instead of drawing a ray from the candle tip to centre of curvature, we
consider a ray that comes from the tip and goes in such a direction that it
would go through the centre of curvature if extended backwards. This ray
is normal to the surface and so will be reflected along the same line in
opposite direction and will go through centre of curvature.
We notice that the two reflected rays (figure-25) diverge and will not
meet. While doing the experiments for a case such as this we were unable
to find any place where we got a sharp image on the screen. This ray diagram
tells us that since the reflected rays are diverging we will not get an image
anywhere. So even if we had moved the screen much away from the mirror,
we would not have found an image.
In such situations, however, we do see an image when we look in the
mirror. Is it possible to explain this image with a ray diagram?
Remember what we did to find the image in a plane mirror. To decide
the position of image we extended the reflected rays backwards till they
met. We will do the same here. When we look in the mirror we are looking
at these diverging reflected rays. They appear to be coming from one point.
We can get this point by extending the raysbackwards as shown in figure-26. The image does
not really exist the way we saw in other cases, but it
is visible to us.
As seen in the figure-26, the image will be erect
and enlarged. Does this match with yourobservations?
This image that we got by extending the rays backwards is called a
virtual image. We cannot get this on a screen like
a real image .
The case in which the object is at the centre of
curvature is another interesting situation. See
figure-27.
From the ray diagram (figure-27) we conclude
that the image of the object will be formed at the
same distance as the object and it will be invertedand be of the same size. What is your observation?
R1
F C OPR3
I
fig-26
R1
R2
C F P
fig-27
Think and discuss
•How can one see an image formed on the object itself? Draw a
ray diagram. Do the experiment.

Free distribution by A.P. Government 61From the ray diagrams and the observations you may have noticed some
peculiar properties of concave mirrors. They enlarge the image when the
object is held close to the mirror (less than the focal length). Also, theimage is erect. This property is used at many places and most commonly
in shaving mirrors and mirrors used by dentists.
Another property is the way that it can converge the rays to its focal
point. This is extensively used in many places. Look at the shape of TV
dish antennas.
If you look around you will see many curved surfaces but all surfaces
are not concave, many of these are convex.
Have you observed the rare view mirrors of a car?
What type of surface do they have?
Have you observed images formed on the rear and
window glasses of a car?  What type of surfaces are these?
See figure -28.
Can we draw ray diagrams for convex surfaces?
Ray diagrams for convex mirrors
One can draw ray diagrams for a convex mirror too. The ‘easy’ rays
that we identified earlier can be used in this case with small modification.
Here there are three rules which describe these rays. The procedure fordrawing the diagram is similar and is not repeated here.
Rule 1:  A ray parallel to the axis, on
meeting the convex mirror will get reflected
so as to appear as if it is coming from the
focal point. See figure-29.
Rule 2: This is
converse of Rule 1. A ray travelling in the direction of the
focal point, after reflection, will become parallel to the
axis. See figure-30.
Rule 3:  A ray travelling in the direction
of the centre of curvature will, onreflection, travel in the opposite directionand appears to be coming from the centre
of curvature. See figure-31.
fig-29
fig-28
C F PR1
C F
fig-30
CFR3
fig-31R2
P
P
Reflection of Light by Different Surfaces 62 X ClassUsing these rules, draw ray diagrams to show formation of images
when an object is placed at different positions and note down your
conclusions. Verify your results experimentally.
If necessary use another ray which comes from the object and reaches
the pole of the mirror.
You may get the image at a particular distance when you place the object
at a certain distance. Do you find any relation between the object distance(u)
and the image distance(v)?
Derivation of formula for curved mirrors
Observe figure 32.
A ray coming from the point O which is
on the principal axis of the mirror falls on the
mirror at point A which is at height ‘h’ from
the axis and after reflection, passes throughpoint I which is also on the axis.
Here AC is the normal. The angle of
incidence (angle OAC) and the angle of
reflection (angle CAI) are equal and they are
denoted by θ in the figure. Line segment AP
I is the perpendicular drawn to
the axis from the point A. Now we can observe three right angled triangles
namely, Triangle AOPI, ACPI and AIPI.
Let the angles at the vertices O, C and I of three triangles be α, β and γ
respectively as shown in figure 32.
In a triangle, sum of the interior angles is equal to the exterior angle.
From the triangle AOC; β = α + θ
θ = β – α
From the triangle ACI; γ = β + θ
By substituting θ = β – α in the above
equation, we get
γ = β + β – α
2β = α + γ  ..........(1)
•  What happens when ‘h’ becomes very
small?
Observe figure 33.
When ‘h’ becomes very small,
1. PI may coincide with point P, which is pole of the mirror.
Then we can say PIO = PO, PIC = PC and PII = PI.
fig-32P
PIFI Cα β γθ
θA
h
O
fig-33P PIF I C Oα
β γθA
h
θWhen h is very small, then
PI coincides with P
Free distribution by A.P. Government 632. The angles α, β and γ become very small as shown in figure 33.
Let us calculate “Tan” values of the angles α, β andγ.
(In a right angled triangle, Tan value of acute angle is the ratio of the
length of the opposite side to the length of the adjacent side of that acute
angle)
Here PI is assumed to coincide with P, then we have
Tan α = PIA/ PIO = h / PIO = h/PO
Tan β = PIA/ PIC = h / PIC = h/PC
Tan γ = PIA/ PII = h / PII = h/PI
When an angle θ becomes very small i.e. close to zero, the value of
numerator (length of the opposite side of the θ) becomes very small. You
can observe this in figure 33. Then the value of Tan θ becomes very small
i.e. close to zero. So the value of Tan θ is taken as θ. That is Tan θ ≈≈≈≈≈ θ.
Similarly here,
Tan α = α = h/PO
Tan β = β = h/PC
Tan γ = γ = h/PI
By substituting the values of α, β and γ in the equation- 1, we get:
2 h/PC = h/PO + h/PI
2/PC = 1/PO + 1/PI .................. (2)
To take the values with correct sign (direction), follow the sign
conventions given below.
Sign convention for the parameters related to the mirror equation
1. All distances should be measured from the pole.
2. The distances measured in the direction of incident light, to be
taken positive and those measured in the direction opposite to
incident light to be taken negative.
3. Height of object (Ho) and height of image (Hi) are positive if
measured upwards from the axis and negative if measured
downwards.
Substitute the values of PC, PO and PI in equation 2 according to the
sign convenction.
Radius of curvature PC = –R
Object distance PO = –u
Image distance PI = –v
2/–R = 1/–u + 1/–v
2/R = 1/u + 1/v
Reflection of Light by Different Surfaces 64 X ClassWe know that, radius of curvature(R) = 2 (focal length) = 2f
So,2/2f = 1/u + 1/v
1/f = 1/u + 1/v
This mirror formula should be used according to the sign convention
in every situation.
Now let us understand magnification, i.e. the relation between the size
of the object and the size of the image.
Magnification (m)
The image formed by a spherical mirror varies in size, here we discuss
the variation in height only.
Observe figure 34.A ray coming from O
I is incident at pole with an angle of incidence θ,
and get reflected with same angle θ.
From the triangle POOI , Tan θ = OOI/PO .....(1)
From the triangle PIII, Tan θ = III/PI ............(2)
From 1 & 2 OOI/PO = III/PI
B III/OOI = PI/PO ................(3)
according to sign convention
PO =  –u; PI =  –v;    OOI  =  h0;    III  = –hi
Substuting the above values in equation (3).
    –hi / h0 = – v/–u
B hi / h0   = – v/u
∴ Magnification m = hi / h0   = – v/u
We define the magnification,
m = height of image(hi) /height of object (h0)
In all cases it can be shown that
m = – image distance (v)/ object distance (u)
Calculate the magnifications with the information you have in table-2,
for all the five cases.
Example
An object 4cm in size, is placed at 25cm infront of a concave mirror
of focal length 15cm. At what distance from the mirror whould a screen be
placed in order to obtain a sharp image?Find the nature and the size of theimage.
fig-34I
IIOOI
P FC
Free distribution by A.P. Government 65
fig-35C PFSolution
Accordint to sign convention:
focal length    (f) = –15cm
object distance (u) = –25cm
object height (ho) = +4cm
image distance (v) = ?
image height (hi) = ?
Substitute teh above values in the equation
1/f = 1/u + 1/v
1/–15 = 1/v + 1/–25
1/v = 1/25 – 1/15
1/v = – 2/75
B v = –37.5cm
So the screen should be placed at 37.5cm from the pole of the mirror.
The image is real.
magnification m = hi / ho= – v/u
by substituting the above values hi/4 = –(–37.5) / (–25)
hi = –(37.5 x 4)/25
hi = –6cm
So, the image is inverted and enlarged.
––––––––––––––––
We have learnt the phenomenon of reflection of light by curved mirrors.
Let us make use of it in our daily life.
Making of solar cooker
You might have heard the story of Archimedes  that
he burned ships using mirrors.
Can we at least heat up a vessel using a mirror?Let us try:
We already learnt that a concave mirror focuses
parallel sun rays at the focal point of the mirror. So
with a small concave mirror we can heat up and burn
paper as shown in the figure-35. (Try this with convexmirror also. What do you observe?)
In the same way make a big concave mirror to heat up a vessel.
You might have observed the TV dish antenna. Make a wooden/ iron
frame in in the shape of TV dish. Cut acrylic mirror sheets in to 8 or 12
FCOI
O P
fig-E
Reflection of Light by Different Surfaces 66 X Class
fig-36
fig-37FPpieces in the shape of isosceles triangles with a height equal to
the radius of your dish antenna. The bases of 8 or 12 triangles
together make the circumference of the dish. Stick the trianglemirrors to the dish as shown in figure-36.
Your solar heater/cooker is ready.
Arrange it so that concave part faces sun. Find its focal point
and place a vessel at that point. It will get heated. You can even
cook rice in that vessel!
In practical applications (like in car-headlights), concave
mirrors are of parabolic shape (see figure 37)
Key words
angle of incidence, angle of reflection, normal, plane of reflection, lateral inversion,
centre of curvature, radius of curvature, principal axis, pole, focus/focal point, focal
length, object distance, image distance, virtual image, real image, magnification
•Fermat principle: Light chooses the path which takes the least time to travel. It is also applicable
to reflection of light.
•Mirror formula: 1/f = 1/u + 1/v
•Magnification m = size of the image/ size of the object (or)
m = – object distance/ image distanceWhat we have learnt
Position of the
candle (object)Enlarged?/
diminished?Inverted or
erectPosition of
the image
Between mirror & F Behind the mirror Enlarged Erect V irtual
On focal point At infinity       -       -      -
Between F and C Beyond C Enlarged Inverted Real
On centre of curvature On C Same size Inverted Real
Beyond C Between F and C Diminished Inverted RealReal or
virtual
Free distribution by A.P. Government 671. State the laws of reflection of light. (AS1)
2. How do you find the focal length of a concave mirror? (AS1)
3. Where will the image form when we place an object, on the principal axis of a concave mirror
at a point between focus and centre of curvature? (AS1)
4. Find the distance of the image when an object is placed on the principal axis at a distance of
10cm in front of a concave mirror whose radius of curvature is 8 cm. (AS1)
5. State the differences between convex and concave mirrors. (AS1)
6. Distinguish between real and virtual images. (AS1)
7. How do you get a virtual image using a concave mirror? (AS1)
8. What do you know about the terms given below related to spherical mirrors? (AS1)
a) Pole b) Centre of curvature c) Focus
d) Radius of curvature e) Focal length f) Principal axis
g)  Object distance h) Image distance i) Magnification
9. Write the rules for sign convention. (AS1)
10. The magnifaction produced by a plane mirror is +1. What does this mean? (AS1)
11. Imagine that spherical mirrors were not known to human beings. Guess the consequences.
(AS2)
12. By observing steel vessels and different images in them; Surya, a third class student, asked his
elder sister Vidya some questions. What may be those questions? (AS2)
13. How do you verify the 1st law of reflection of light with an experiment? (AS3)14. How do you verify the 2nd law of reflection of light with an experiment? (AS3)
15. What do you infer from the experiment which you did with concave mirrors and measured the
distance of object and distance of image? (AS3)
16. Find the plane of the reflection experimentally for the incident ray which passes through the
heads of the pins pierced in front of the mirror. (AS3)
17. Collect information about the history of spherical mirrors in human civilization. Display it in your
class room. (AS4)
18. Think about the objects which act as a concave or convex mirrors in your surroundings. Make
a table and display it in your class room. (AS4)
19. How will our image be in concave and convex mirrors? Collect photographs and display in
your class room. (AS4)
20. Draw and explain the process of formation of image with a pinhole camera? (AS5)21. Draw suitable rays by which we can guess the position of the image formed by a concave
mirror. (AS5)
22. Show the formation of image with a ray diagram when an object is placed on the principal axis
of a concave mirror away from the centre of curvature. (AS5)
23. Make a solar heater/cooker and explain the process of making. (AS5)24. To form the image on the object itself, how should we place the object in front of a concave
mirror? Explain with a ray diagram. (AS5)
25. How do you appreaciate the role of spherical mirrors in daily life? (AS6)Improve your learning

Reflection of Light by Different Surfaces 68 X ClassMultiple choice questionsFill in the blanks26. How do you appreciate the use of reflection of light by a concave mirror in making of TV
antenna dishes? (AS6)
27. Have you ever observed the image of the sky in rain water pools on earth? Explain the reflection
of light in this context. (AS6)
28. Discuss the merits and demerits of using mirrors in building elevation. (AS7)
29. Why do we prefer a convex mirror as a rear-view mirror in the vehicles? (AS7)
30. A convex mirror with a radius of curvature of 3m is used as rear view in an automobile. If a bus
is located at 5m from this mirror, find the position, nature and size of the imaze. (AS7)
31. An object is placed at a distance of 10cm from a convex mirror of focal length 15cm. Find the
position and nature of the image. (AS7)
1. The centre of sphere to which a sperical mirror belongs, is called ..............................
2. The geometric centre of the mirror is ...........................
3. The line which passes through the centre of curvature and pole is ..........................
4. The rays which are parallel to the principal axis of a concave mirror on reflection, meet at
............................
5. The distance between pole and centre of curvature is .............................6. The distance between pole and focus is .............................
7. The relation between focal length and radius of curvature is given by ..............................
8. The relation between the angle of incidence and angle of reflection is given by .......................
9. Light selects the least time path to travel between two points. This principle was stated by
.........................
10. The equation of mirror formula is ....................
1. If an object is placed at C on the principal axis in front of a concave mirror, the position of the
image is ........................ [ ]
a) at infinity b) between F and C c)  at C d) beyond C
2. We get a diminished image with a concave mirror when the object is placed .......... [ ]
a)  at F b) between the pole and F c) at C d) beyond C
3. We get a virtual image in a concave mirror when the object is placed .............. [ ]
a)  at F b) between the pole and F c) at C d) beyond C
4. Magnification m = ...................... [ ]
a) v/u b) u/v c) 
 ho / hid)  hi / ho
5. A ray which seems to be travelling through the focus of a convex mirror passes ........................
after reflection [ ]
a) parallel to the axis b) along the same path in opposite direction
c) through F d) through C
Free distribution by A.P. Government 69In class VII you learnt about acids, bases and salts.
You know that  acids are sour to taste and turn blue litmus to red, bases
are soapy to touch and turn red litmus to blue.
If someone in the family is suffering from a problem of acidity, which
of the following would you suggest as a remedy?
 lemon juice, vinegar or baking soda solution.
•Which property do you think of while suggesting the remedy?
There are many natural materials like litmus, extract of red cabbage,
turmeric solution and extracts of coloured petals of some flowers contain
dye molecules which are weak acids or bases. These can be used as acid-
base indicators to detect the nature of the solution for acidity or basicity.In adition to the above natural acid-base indicators, there are some synthetic
indicators such as methyl orange and phenolphthalein that can be used to
test for acids and bases.
In this chapter you study the reactions of acids and bases. How do
acids neutralize bases? Many more interesting activities that we use andsee in our day-to-day life are also studied.
Do you know?
Litmus solution is a dye extracted from lichen, a plant belonging to the division
of Thallophyta and is used as indicator. In neutral solution litmus colour is purple.
Coloured petals of some flowers such as Hydrangea, Petunia and Geranium are also
used as indicators.Acids, Bases and Salts4Chapter

Acids, Bases and Salts 70 X ClassChemical properties of Acids and Bases
Response of various laboratory substances with indicators.
Activity  1
Collect the following samples from the science laboratory;
hydrochloric acid (HC l), sulphuric acid (H2SO4), nitric acid (HNO3),
acetic acid (CH3COOH), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), calcium hydroxide
[Ca(OH)2], magnesium hydroxide [Mg(OH)2],ammonium hydroxide
(NH4OH) and potassium hydroxide (KOH), prepare dilute solutions of
the respective substances.
Take four watch glasses and put one drop of the first solution in each
one of them and test the solution as follows.
i. dip the blue litmus paper in the first watch glass.ii. dip the red litmus paper in the second watch glass.
iii. add a drop of methyle organge to the third watch glass, and
iv. add a drop of phenolphthalein to the fourth watch glass.
Observe the respective colour changes and note down in the chart
below.
Table-1
•What do you conclude from the observations noted in table-1?
•Identify the sample as acidic or basic solution.
There are some substances whose odour changes in acidic or basic
media. These are called olfactory indicators.
Let us work with some of such indicators.Sample
solutionRed litmus
paperBlue litmus
paperPhenolphthalein
solutionMethyl
orange
solution
1H C l
2H2SO4
3 HNO3
4C H3COOH
5 NaOH6 KOH
7 Mg(OH)
2
8N H4OH
9 Ca(OH)2S.No.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 71Activity  2
- Put some finely chopped onions in a plastic bag along with some
clean cloth. Tie up the bag tightly and keep it overnight in the fridge.
The cloth strips can now be used to test for acid or base.
- Check the odour of the cloth strips.
- Keep two strips on a clean surface and put a few drops of dilute
HCl on one strip and a few drops of dilute NaOH on the other.
- Rinse both the strips separately with distilled water and again check
their odour and note the observation.
- Take some clove oil and vanilla essence.- Take some dilute HC l in one test tube and dilute NaOH in another
test tube. Add a drop of dilute vanilla essence to both test tubes
and shake well. Check the odour and record your observations.
- Test the change of odour with clove oil using dilute HC l and dilute
NaOH and record your observations.
Suggest which of these- onion, vanilla essence and clove oil, can be
used as olfactory indicators on the basis of your observations.
•What do you conclude from above activity?
•Can you give example for use of olfactory indicators in daily life?
Discuss with your teacher.
Why pickles and sour substances are not stored in brass and copper
vessels?
Reaction of Acids and bases with Metals
Lab Activity
fig-1:Reaction of zinc
granules with dil. HCl
and testing hydrogen gas
by a burning match stickZinc granulesHCl H2Testing of hydrogen gasDelivery tube
Soap waterStand
Test tube
Acids, Bases and Salts 72 X ClassMaterials required:  test tube, delivery tube, glass trough, candle,
soap water, dil. HC l, and zinc granules.
Procedure:  Set the apparatus as shown in fig. 1.
- Take about 10ml of dilute HC l in a test tube and add a few zinc
granules to it.
- What do you observe on the surface of the zinc granules?
- Pass the gas being evolved through the soap water.- Why are bubbles formed in the soap solution?- Bring a burning candle near the gas filled bubble.- What do you observe?You will notice the gas evolved burns with a pop sound indicating H
2 .
The chemical reaction of the above activity is:
Acid          +   Metal J    Salt             +     Hydrogen
2 HC l (aq)   +   Zn(s)J    Zn C l2 (aq)   +     H2 (g)
Repeat the above experiment with some other acids like H2SO4 and
HNO3.
•What do you observe in all these cases?
From the above activities you can conclude that when acid reacts with
metal H2 gas is evolved.
Caution: This activity needs the teacher’s assistance.
Activity   3
Place a few granules of zinc metal in one of the test tubes and add
10 ml of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution and warm the contents of the
test tube.
Repeat the rest of the steps as in activity-2 and record your
observations.
In this activity also you will notice that evolved gas is hydrogen (H2)
and salt formed is sodium zincate.
The reaction is written as follows.
2 NaOH    +   Zn J      Na2 ZnO2    +    H2
                                                   (Sodium zincate)
However, such reactions are not possible with all metals.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 73Reaction of carbonates and metal hydrogen carbonates  with Acids
Activity 4
•Take two test tubes; label them as A and
B.  Take about 0.5 gm of sodium
carbonate (Na2CO3) in test tube A and
about 0.5 gm of sodium hydrogencarbonate (NaHCO
3) in test tube B.
•Add about 2 ml of dilute HC l to both
the test tubes.
•What do you observe?
•Pass the gas produced in each case
through lime water (calcium hydroxidesolution) as shown in Fig 2 and record
your observations.
The reactions occurring in the above activities are as follows:
Na
2 CO3 (S)  +  2 HC l (aq) J  2 NaC l (aq)  +  H2O (l) + CO2 (g)
NaHCO3 (S)  +  HC l (aq)    J NaCl (aq)   +  H2O (l) + CO2 (g)
Pass the gas evolved through lime water.
Ca (OH)2 (aq) +  CO2 (g)  J CaCO3     +     H2O (l)
(White precipitate)
On passing excess carbon dioxide the following reaction takes places:
CaCO3 (S) +   H2O (l) + CO2 (g)  J     Ca (HCO3)2 (aq)
                                                              (Soluble in water)
Thus from above activities you can conclude that the reaction of  metal
carbonates and hydrogen carbonates with acids give a corresponding salt,
carbon dioxide and water. We can write generalized form of these chemical
reactions as shown below:
metal carbonate + acid   J salt + carbon dioxide + water
metal hydrogen carbonate + acid J salt + carbon dioxide + water
fig-2: Passing CO2 gas through
Ca(OH)2 solutiondil. HC l
acidCO2 gasCorkStandThistle
funnel
Delivery tube
Test tube
Na2CO3Ca(OH)2solution
Acids, Bases and Salts 74 X ClassNeutralization reaction
Activity  5
Acid – base (Neutralization) reaction
Take about 2 ml of dilute NaOH solution in a test tube and add one
drop of phenolphthalein indicator. Observe the colour of the solution.
 -  Add dilute HC l solution to the above solution drop by drop.  Is
there any change of colour of the solution?
•Why did the colour of the solution change after adding the HC l
solution?
- Now add one or two drops of NaOH to the above mixture.
•Does the Pink colour reappear?
•Do you guess the reason for reappearance of pink colour?In the above activity you observe that the pink colour disappears on
adding HC l  because NaOH is completely reacted with HC l. The effect of
base is nullified by an acid. Pink colour reappears on adding a drop of
NaOH  because  the solution becomes basic once  again. The reactionoccuring between acid and base in the above activity can be written as:
NaOH 
(aq)    +     HC l (aq)     J      NaC l (aq) + H2O (l)
The reaction of an acid with a base to give a salt and water is known as
a neutralization reaction.  In general, a neutralization reaction can be written
as:
Base   +   Acid   J Salt    +   Water
Reaction of metal oxides with acids
Acivity  6
•Take a small amount of copper oxide in a beaker and slowly add dilute
hydrochloric acid while stirring. Observe the changes in the solution.
•Note the colour of the solution.
Think and discuss
•Is the substance present in antacid tablet acidic or basic?
•What type of reaction takes place in stomach when an antacid tablet is consumed?
Free distribution by A.P. Government 75•What do you observe in the above reaction?
You will notice that the copper oxide present in the beaker dissolves
in dilute HC l and the colour of the solution becomes blueish-green. The
reason for this change is the formation of copper (II) chloride in the
reaction.  The general reaction between a metal oxide and an acid can bewritten as:
Metal oxide    +   Acid  J   Salt   +   Water
Write the chemical equation for the reaction between copper oxide
and HC l and balance it.
In above reaction metal oxide reacts with acid to give salt and water.
This reaction is   similar to the reaction of a base with an acid that we have
observed in activity - 5.
•What do you conclude from the Activity-5 and 6?In both the reactions salt and water are the products. Both metallic
oxides and metal hydrides give salt and water when they react with an acid.
Thus we can conclude that metal oxides are basic in nature like the metalhydroxides.
Reaction of a non-metal oxide with a base
You saw the reaction between carbon dioxide and calcium hydroxide
(lime water) in activity-4.  Calcium hydroxide, which is a base, reacts with
carbon dioxide to produce a salt and water. This reaction is similar to the
reaction between a base and an acid. Thus we can conclude that carbon
dioxide which is a non metal oxide is acidic in nature. In general all non-
metal oxides are acidic in nature.
What do acids have in common?
In previous sections you have seen that acids have similar chemical
properties. In lab activity you have observed that acids generate hydrogen
gas on reacting with metals, so hydrogen seems to be common element to
Think and discuss
•You are provided with three test tubes containing distilled water, an acid and a
base solution respectively.  If you are given only blue litmus paper, how do youidentify the contents of each test tube?
•Which gas is usually liberated when an acid reacts with a metal?  How will you
test for the presence of this gas?
•A compound of a calcium reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to produce
effervescence.  The gas evolved extinguishes a burning candle; turns lime watermilky. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction if one of thecompounds formed is calcium chloride.
Acids, Bases and Salts 76 X Classall acids.  Let us perform an activity to investigate whether all compounds
containing hydrogen are acids or not.
Activity  7
Prepare solutions of glucose, alcohol, hydrochloric acid and sulphuric
acid etc.,
Connect two different coloured electrical wires to graphite rods
separately in a 100 ml beaker as shown in figure.
Connect free ends of the wire to 230 volts AC plug  and complete the
circuit as shown in the fig-3 by connecting a bulb to one of the wires.
Now pour some dilute HC l in the beaker and switch on the current.
•What do you notice?
Repeat activity with dilute sulphuric acid and glucose and alcohol
solutions separately.• What do you observe?
• Does the bulb glow in all cases?
You will notice that the bulb glows only
in acid solutions but not in glucose and
alcohol solutions. Glowing of bulb indicates
that there is flow of electric current through
the solution. Acid solutions have ions and themoment of these ions in solution helps for
flow of electric current through the solution.
The positive ion (cation) present in HC l
solution is H
+. This suggests that acids
produce hydrogen ions H+ in solution, which
are responsible for their acidic properties. In
glucose and alcohol solution the bulb did not
glow indicating the absence of H+ ions in these solutions. The acidity of
acids is attributed to the H+ ions produced by them in solutions.
Properties of Bases
What do Bases have in common?
Repeat the Activity-7 using alkalis such as sodium hydroxide, calcium
hydroxide solutions etc., instead of acid solutions.
•Does the bulb glow?
•What do you conclude from the results of this activity?
230 volt Bulb
Beaker
Graphite rodsdil. HC l solution
fig-3: Acid solution in water
conducts electricityAC plug
Free distribution by A.P. Government 77
Do acids produce ions only in aqueous solution?  Let us test this.
Activity 8
- Take about 1.0g of solid NaC l in a clean and dry test tube.
- Add some concentrated sulphuric acid to the test tube.
•What do you observe?  Is there a gas coming out of the delivery tube?
Let us write chemical equation for the above reaction.
2NaC l(s)   +    H2SO4(l)   J  2HC l(g)    +  Na2SO4(s)
Test the gas evolved successively with dry and wet blue litmus paper.
In which case does the litmus paper change colour?
•What do you infer from the above observation?
You can conclude that dry HC l gas (Hydrogen chloride) is not an acid
because you have noticed that there is no change in colour of dry litmus
paper but HC l aqueous solution is an acid because wet blue litmus paper
turned into red.
Note to teachers:   If the climate is very humid, pass the gas produced
through a guard tube (drying tube) containing calcium chloride to dry the
gas.
•Can you write the chemical equation for the reaction taking place at
the mouth of delivery tube?
The HC l gas evolved at delivery tube dissociates in presence of water
to produce hydrogen ions.  In the absence of water dissociation of HC l
molecules do not occur.fig-4: Preparation of HCl gasTest tube
NaClTest tubeCorkDelivery tubeMoist litmus paper
Conical flask
containing
conc H2SO4
Acids, Bases and Salts 78 X ClassThe dissociation of HC l in water is shown below.
HCl   +   H2O   J    H3O+  +  C l-
(aq)
Hydrogen ions cannot exist as bare ions. They associate with water
molecules and exist as as hydrated ions with each H+ attached by 4 to 6
water molecules. For this we represent H+ as hydronium ion, H3O+.
H+   +    H2O   J H3O+
You have learnt that acids give H3O+ or H+ (aq) ion in water.
Let us see what happens when a base is dissolved in water.
              H2O
NaOH (s)     –––––J             Na + 
(aq) + OH –
 (aq)
            H2O
KOH (s)     –––––J             K + 
(aq)  +  OH – (aq)
              H2O
Mg (OH) 2(s)    –––––J         Mg2 (aq) + 2OH – (aq)
On dissolving bases in water produces hydroxide (OH-) ions. Bases
which are soluble in water are called alkalis. All bases donot dissolve in
water. Be(OH)2 is slightly soluble in water.
What do you observe when water is mixed with acid or base?
Activity  9
- Take 10 ml water in a test tube.
-  Add a few drops of concentrated H2SO4 to it and swirl the test tube slowly.
-  Touch the bottom of the test tube.
•What do you feel?
•Is it an exothermic or endothermic process?
Carry out the above activity with sodium hydroxide
pellets instead of H2SO4 and record your observation.
The process of dissolving an acid or a base in water is
an exothermic process.  Care must be taken while mixing
concentrated nitric acid or sulphuric acid with water.  The
acid must always be added slowly to water with constant
stirring.  If water is added to a concentrated acid, the heat
generated may cause the mixture to splash out and cause
burns.  The glass container may also break due to excessive
local heating.  Look out for the warning sign (shown in
fig-5: Warning sign
displayed on containers
containing concentrated
Acids and Bases
Free distribution by A.P. Government 79Fig.5) on the can of concentrated sulphuric acid and on the bottle of sodium
hydroxide pellets.
Mixing an acid or base with water result in decrease in the concentration
of ions (H3O +/OH– ) per unit volume.  Such a process is called dilution
and the acid or the base is said to be diluted.
Can you decide the strength of an acid or base solutions?
Let us find.
Strength of acid or base:
Activity 10
A test to know whether the Acid is strong or weak.
- Take two beakers A and B.
- Fill the beaker A with dil. CH3 COOH (acetic acid) and beaker B
with dil. HC l (Hydrochloric Acid)
- Arrange the apparatus as used in activity-7, and pass electric current
through the solutions in separate beakers.
•What do you observe?
•Can you guess the reason for the changes you observed?You notice that the bulb glows brightly in HC l solution while the
intensity of the bulb is low in acetic acid solution. This indicates that there
are more ions in HC l solution and fewer ions are present in acetic acid
solution. More ions in HC l solution mean more H
3O+ions.Therfore it is a
strong acid. Whereas acetic acid has fewer H3O+ions and hence it is weak
acid.
Carry out the above experiment by taking bases like dil. NaOH (sodium
hydroxide) and dil. NH4OH (ammonium hydroxide) instead of acids.
•What do you observe?  Explain your observations.
The universal indicator can also be used to know the strength of acid
or base. Universal indicator is a mixture of several indicators.  The universal
indicator shows different colours at different concentrations of hydrogen
ions in a solution.
Think and discuss
•Why do HC l, HNO3 etc., show acidic characters in aqueous solutions while
solutions of compounds like alcohol and glucose do not show acidic character?
•While diluting an acid, why is it recommended that the acid should be added towater and not water to the acid?
Acids, Bases and Salts 80 X ClasspH scale
A scale for measuring hydrogen ion concentration in a solution is called
pH scale. (The ‘p’ in pH stands for ‘Potenz’ German ‘Potenz’ is power).
pH value of a solution is simply a number which indicates the acidic or
basic nature of a solution.
The pH of neutral solutions is 7. Values less than 7 on the pH scale
represent an acidic solution.  As the pH value increases from 7 to 14, it
represents a decrease in H3O+ ion concentration or an increase in OH– ion
concentration in the solution. pH value of a solution above  ‘7’ represents
a basic solution.
Observe the following figure.
Activity 11
- Test the pH value of solutions given in table using pH paper.
- Record your observations in column three of Table – 2.
- Write approximate pH values in column 4 using Universal Indicator
solution.
•What is the nature of each substance on the basis of your observations?

Free distribution by A.P. Government 81
The strength of acid or base depends on the concentraction of H3O+
ions or OH– produced in solution. If we take hydrochloric acid and acetic
acid of the same concentration then they produce different concentration
of hydrogen ions. Acids that give more H3O+ ions are said to be strong
acids that give fewer H3O+ ions are said to be weak acid. Can you now
predict what weak and strong bases are?NEUTRALACIDALKALI
strong weak weak strong
fig -7: pH value as shown by different colour in universal indicatorS.No. Solution Colour pH
paperApproximate
pH valueNature of
substances
1H C l
2C H3COOH
3N H4Cl
4C H3COONa
5 NaHCO3
6N a2CO3
7 NaOH
8 Distilled water
9 Lemon juice
10 Carrot juice
11 Coffee
12 Tomato juice
13 Tap water
14 Banana juice
15 Colourless aerated drink16 Saliva (before meal)17 Saliva (after meal)
Table-2

Acids, Bases and Salts 82 X Class
Do you know?
To avoid the negative powers
of H+ concentration in dilute acid
and base solutions Sorensen
introduced the concept of pH. Due
to this pH concept may be
restricted for solutions of [H+]
less than 1 molar.
The pH scale is from 0-14.
The pH is an indication ofconcentration of H
+. For example,
at a pH of zero the hydronium ion
concentration is one molar.Typically the concentrations of H
+
in water in most solutions fallbetween a range of 1 M (pH=0)and 10
-14 M (pH=14). Figure 8
depicts the pH scale with commonsolutions.
battery acid
lemon juice
pure rain (H2O in
equilibrium with
atmospheric CO2
freshly
distilled water
seawater
baking soda
(NaHCO3 solution)
household
ammonia (NH3)
household lye
(NaOH solution)household bleach
(NaC lO solution)gastric fluid
carbonated
beverages
vinger
orange juice
beer
coffee
egg yolks
milk
blood
milk of
magnesia[Mg(OH)
2]
solution
Importance of pH in everyday life
1.  Are plants and animals pH sensitive?
Living organisms can survive only in a narrow range of pH change.
When pH of rain water is less than 5.6, it is called acid rain.  When acid
rain flows in to the rivers, it lowers the pH of the river water, the survival
of aquatic life in such rivers becomes difficult.fig -8: Solutions and the
placement of them on pH
scale
Think and discuss
•What will happen if the pH value in our body increases?
•Why do living organism have narrow pH range?
Free distribution by A.P. Government 832.  Is pH change cause of tooth decay?
Tooth decay starts when the pH of the mouth is lower than 5.5. Tooth
enamel, made of calcium phosphate is the hardest substance in the body.
It does not dissolve in water, but is corroded when the pH in the mouth is
below 5.5. Bacteria present in the mouth produce acids by degradation of
sugar and food particles remaining in the mouth.  The best way to prevent
this is to clean the mouth after eating food.  Using tooth pastes, which are
generally basic neutralize the excess acid and prevent tooth decay.
3.   pH in our digestive system:
It is very interesting to note that our stomach produces hydrochloric
acid.  It helps in the digestion of food without harming the stomach.  During
indigestion the stomach produces too much acid and this causes pain and
irritation.  To get rid of this pain, people use bases called antacids. These
antacids neutralize the excess acid in the stomach. Magnesium hydroxide
(milk of magnesia), a mild base, is often used for this purpose.
Activity  12
- Take dil. HC l in a beaker and add two to three drops methyl orange
indicator. Note the colour of the solution
- Mix antacid tablet powder to the above solution in the beaker. Now
observe the change in colour of solution.
•What is the reason for the change in colour of solution?
•Can you write the chemical equation for this reaction?
4.   pH of the soil
Plants require a specific pH range for their healthy growth.  To find
out the pH required for the healthy growth of a plant, you can collect the
soil samples from various places and check the pH in the manner described
below in the following activity.   Also you can note down what type of
plants are growing in the region from which you have collected the soil.
Activity  13
Put about 2g soil in a test tube and add 5ml water to it. Shake the
contents of the test tube. Filter the contents and collect the filtrate in a
test tube.
Check the pH of this filtrate with the help of universal indicator paper.
•What can you conclude about the ideal soil pH for the growth of plants
in your region?
•Under what soil conditions a farmer would treat the soil of his fields
with quicklime (calcium hydroxide) or calcium carbonate?
Acids, Bases and Salts 84 X ClassSelf defense by animals and plants through chemical war fare?
Have you ever been stung by a honey-bee?  Bee sting leaves an acid
which causes pain and irritation.  Use of a mild base like baking soda on
the stung area gives relief.  Stinging hair of leaves of nettle plant, inject
methanoic acid causing burning pain.
•A traditional remedy is rubbing the area with the leaf of the dock plant,
which often grows besides the nettle in the wild.
More about salts
In the previous sections you have studied the formation of salts by the
neutralization reaction of base with an acid.  Let us understand more about
the preparation, properties and uses of salts.
Family of salts
Activity 14
- Write the formulae of the following salts.
- Potassium sulphate, sodium sulphate, calcium sulphate, magnesium
sulphate, copper sulphate, sodium chloride, sodium nitrate, sodium
corbonate and ammonium chloride.
- Identify the acids and bases from which the above salts are obtained.
- Salts having the same positive or negative radicals belong to a
family.  For example, NaC l and Na2SO4 belong to the family of
sodium salts.  Similarly, NaC l, and KCl belong to the family of
chloride salts.
•How many families can you identify among the salts given above?
pH of Salts
Activity 15
- Collect the salt samples like, sodium chloride, aluminum chloride,
copper sulphate, sodium acetate, ammonium chloride,  sodium
hydrogen carbonate and sodium carbonate.
- Dissolve them in distilled water.
- Check the action of these solutions with litmus papers.
- Find the pH using pH paper (universal indicator).
- Classify them into acidic, basic or neutral salts?
- Identify the acid and base used to form the above salts.
- Record your observations in Table -   given below.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 85Salt of a strong acid and a strong base are neutral and the pH value is 7.
The salts of a strong acid and weak base are acidic and the pH value is less
than 7. The salts of a strong base and weak acid are basic in nature and the
pH value is more than 7.
•What do you say about salts of both weak acid and weak base?
In such cases the pH depends on the relative strengths of acid and
base.
Chemicals from common salt
Salts are the ionic compounds which are produced by the neutralization
of acid with base.  Salts are electrically neutral.  There are number of salts
but sodium chloride is the most common among them.  Sodium chloride
is also known as table salt or common salt.  Sodium chloride is used to
enhance the taste of food.
Sea water contains many salts dissolved in it.  Sodium chloride is the
predominant component and it is separated from these salts.  Deposits of
solid salt are also found in several parts of the world.  These deposits oflarge crystals are often brown due to impurities.  This is called rock salt.Beds of rock salt were formed when seas of bygone ages dried up.  Rocksalt is mined like coal.
Common salt – A raw material for chemicals
The common salt is an important raw material for various materials of
daily use, such as sodium hydroxide, baking soda, washing soda, bleaching
powder and many more. Let us see how one substance is used for making
all these different substances.
Sodium hydroxide from common salt
When electricity is passed through an aqueous solution of sodium
chloride (called brine), it decomposes to form sodium hydroxide.  The
process is called the chlor-alkali process – because of the products formed
chlor for chlorine and alkali for sodium hydroxide.Salt pH Acidic Basic Neutral
Acids, Bases and Salts 86 X Class
Do you know?
Salt – a symbol of freedom struggle:  You
know common salt as a substance which enhances
the taste of food; it also has played a remarkablerole in motivating the people towards freedom
struggle. The tax levied by the British government
on common food substance (salt), for both the
poor and the rich, made them to become unite in
the freedom struggle.
You must have heard about Mahatma Gandhi’s
Dandi March and about ‘salt satyagraha’ in the
struggle for freedom of India.
2 NaC l ( aq) + 2H2O (l)  J   2 NaOH (aq) +  Cl2 (g) + H2 (g)
Chlorine gas is given off at the anode and hydrogen gas at the cathode,
sodium hydroxide solution is formed near the cathode the three products
produced in this process are all useful Fig. shows the different uses ofthese products.
Bleaching Powder
You know that chlorine is produced during the electrolysis of aqueous
sodium chloride (brine).  This chlorine gas is used for the manufacture offig-9: Important product from chlor-alkali processat Cathode at Anode
Fuels, margarine,
ammonia for fertilisersWater treatment, swimming pools, PVC,
disinfectants, CFC’s, pesticides
HYDROCHLORIC ACID
For: cleaning steel, ammonium chloride, medicines, cosmeticsBLEACH (CaOC l2)
For: household bleahes, bleaching fabricDe-greasing metals, soaps and detergents,
paper making, artificial fibresH2Cl2NaOH
Free distribution by A.P. Government 87bleaching powder.  Bleaching power is produced by the action of chlorine
on dry slaked lime [Ca(OH)2]. Bleaching powder is represented by formula
CaOCl2, though the actual composition is quite complex.
Ca (OH)2  +  C l2J CaOC l2  +  H2O
Uses of Bleaching Powder:
1. It is used for bleaching cotton and linen in the textile industry for
bleaching wood pulp in paper industry and for bleaching washed clothesin laundry.
2. Used as an oxidizing agent in many chemical industries.
3. Used for disinfecting drinking water to make it free of germs.
4.  Used as a reagent in the preparation of chloroform.
Baking soda
Baking soda is sometimes added for faster cooking.  The chemical
name of the compound is sodium hydrogen carbonate (NaHCO3). It is
prepared as follows:
NaCl + H2O + CO2 + NH3   J  NH4 Cl  +  NaHCO3
Can you find the pH of sodium hydrogen carbonate as you have done
in activity-14?  Can you predict the reason for using NaHCO3 to neutralize
an acid?
Baking soda is a mild non-corrosive base.The following reaction takes place when it is heated during cooking.
        
Heat
2NaHCO3    –––––J        Na2CO3 + H2O+CO2
Uses of sodium hydrogen carbonate
i) Baking powder is a mixture of baking soda and a mild edible acid such
as tartaric acid.  When baking powder is heated or mixed in water, the
following reaction takes place.
NaHCO3 + H+     J CO2 + H2O  +  sodium  salt of acid.
Carbon dioxide produced during the reaction causes bread or cake to
rise making them soft and spongy.
ii) Sodium hydrogen carbonate is also an ingredient in antacids.  Being
alkaline, it neutralizes excess acid in the stomach and provides relief.
iii) It is also used in soda-acid fire extinguishers
iv) It acts as mild antiseptic.
Acids, Bases and Salts 88 X ClassWashing soda (sodium carbonate)
Another chemical that can be obtained from sodium chloride is
Na2CO3. 10 H2O(washing soda).  You have seen above that sodium
carbonate can be obtained by heating baking soda. Recrystallisation of
sodium carbonate gives washing soda.  It is also a basic salt.
Na2 CO3 + 10 H2O     J   Na2 CO3 .10 H2O
Sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogen carbonate are useful
chemicals for many industrial processes.
Uses of Washing soda
i) Sodium carbonate (washing soda) is used in glass, soap and paper
industries.
ii) It is used in the manufacture of sodium compounds such as borax.
iii)Sodium carbonate can be used as a cleaning agent for domestic
purposes.
iv) It is used for removing permanent hardness of water.
•What does 10 H2O signify?
•Does it make Na2CO3 wet?
•Are the crystals of salts really dry?
Let us find
Removing water of crystallisation
Activity  16
- Take a few crystals of copper sulphate in a dry test tube and heat
the test tube.
- What change did you
notice in the colour of the copper
sulphate after heating?
•Did you notice water droplets
on sides of the test tube?Where did they come from?
Add 2-3 drops of water on the
sample of copper sulphate obtained
after heating.
•What do you observe?  Is the
blue colour of copper sulphate
restored?
fig-10: Removing water of
crystallisationTest tube holder
Water droplets
Copper sulphate
crystalsBoiling
tube
Burner
Free distribution by A.P. Government 89In the above activity copper sulphate crystals which seem to be dry
contain the water of crystallization, when these crystals are heated, water
present in crystals is evaporated and the salt turns white.
When the crystals are moistened with water, the blue colour reappears.
Water of crystallization is the fixed number of water molecules present
in one formula unit of a salt.  Five water molecules are present in one
formula unit of copper sulphate.  Chemical formula for hydrated copper
sulphate is CuSO4.5 H2O.
Now you would be able to answer the question whether the molecule
of Na2 CO3. 10 H2O is wet or not.
Another salt which possesses water of crystallisation is gypsum. It has
two water molecules in its crystals and the formula is CaSO4. 2H2O.
Let us see the use of this salt.
Plaster of paris (CaSO4 ½ H2O)
On careful heating of gypsum (CaSO4 2 H2O) at 373 K it loses water
molecules partially to become calcium sulphate hemihydrate
(CaSO4.½ H2O).  This is called plaster of paris , the substance which
doctors use as plaster for supporting fractured bones in the right position.Plaster of paris is a white powder and on mixing with water, it sets intohard solid mass due to the formation of gypsum.
CaSO
4. ½ H2O    +     1½ H2O   J    CaSO4. 2H2O
        (Plaster of Paris)                                                (Gypsum)
Note: You might have noticed that only half a water molecule is shown
to be attached as water of crystalisation.
•How can you get half a water molecule?It is written in this form because two formula units of CaSO
4 share
one molecule of water.
Plaster of paris is used for making toys, materials for decoration and
for making surfaces smooth.
•Try to collect the information for calling calcium sulphate hemihydrates
as Plaster of Paris.
Acids, Bases and Salts 90 X ClassImprove your learning
Key words
Indicator, Acid, Base, Red litmus, Blue litmus, Phenolphthalein,
Methyl orange, Salts, Neutralization, Guard tube, Hydronium ion,
Alkali, Strong acid, Strong base, Universal indicator,   pH scale,
Potenz, Antacids, tooth decay, Family of Salts, Common salt, Bleaching
powder, Baking soda, Washing soda,Hydrated salt, Water of
crystallization, Plaster of Paris.
•Acid – base indicators are dyes or mixtures of dyes which are used to indicate the presence of
acids and bases.
•Acidic nature of a substance is due to the formation of H+ (aq) ions in solution.  Formation of
OH- (aq) ions in solution is responsible for the basic nature of a substance.
•When a base reacts with a metal with the evolution of hydrogen gas, a salt is formed.
•When an acid reacts with a metal carbonate or metal hydrogen carbonate gives the correspondingsalt, carbon dioxide gas and water.
•Acidic and basic solutions in water conduct electricity because they produce hydrogen ions andhydroxide ions respectively.
•The strength of an acid or an alkali can be tested by using a scale called the pH scale (0-14)which gives the measure of hydrogen ion concentration in a solution.
•A neutral solution has a pH of 7, while an acidic solution has a pH less than 7 and a basic
solution has a pH more than 7.
•Living beings carry out their metabolic activities within an optimal pH range.
•Mixing concentrated acids or bases with water is a highly exothermic process.
• Acids and bases neutralize each other to form corresponding salts and water.
• Water of crystallization is the fixed number of water molecules chemically attached to each
formula unit of a salt in its crystalline form.
• Salts have various uses in everyday life and in industries.
1. Five solutions A, B, C, D and E when tested with universal indicator showed pH as  4, 1, 11, 7
and 9, respectively, which solution is (AS1)
         (a)  neutral  (b)  strongly alkaline  (c)  strongly acidic  (d)  weakly acidic  (e) weakly alkaline
        Arrange the pH in increasing order of hydrogen ion concentration.What we have learnt

Free distribution by A.P. Government 91Fill in the blanks2. What is a neutralization reaction?  Give two examples. (AS1)
3. What happens when an acid or base is mixed with water? (AS1)
4. Why does tooth decay start when the pH of mouth is lower than 5.5? (AS1)
5. Why does not distilled water conduct electricity? (AS2)6. Dry hydrogen chloride gas does not turn blue litmus to red whereas hydrochloric acid does.      Why? (AS1)7. Why pure acetic acid does not turn blue litmus to red? (AS2)
8. A milkman adds a very small amount of baking soda to fresh milk. (AS2)
a) Why does he shift the pH of the fresh milk from 6 to slightly alkaline?b) Why does this milk take a long time to set as curd?
9. Plaster of Paris should be stored in moisture – proof container.  Explain why? (AS2)
10.  Fresh milk has a pH of 6.  Explain why the pH changes as it turns into curd?  (AS3)
11. Compounds such as alcohols and glucose contain hydrogen but are not categorized as acids.
Describe an activity to prove it. (AS3)
12. What is meant by “water of crystallization” of a substance?  Describe an activity to show the
water of crystallisation. (AS3)
13.  Equal lengths of magnesium ribbons are taken in test tubes A and B.  Hydrochloric  acid is
added to test tube A, while acetic acid is added to test tube B.  Amount and  concentration of
both the acids is same. In which test tube will the fizzing  occur more vigorously and why?(AS4)
14.  Draw a neat diagram showing acid solution in water conducts electricity. (AS5)
15.  How do you prepare your own indicator using beetroot? Explain. (AS5)16.  How does the flow of acid rain into a river make the survival of aquatic life in  a river difficult?
(AS7)
17.  What is baking powder?  How does it make the cake soft and spongy? (AS7)
18.  Give two important uses of washing soda and baking soda. (AS7)
1. i.  ____________ taste is a characteristic property of all acids in aqueous solution.
ii. Acids react with some metals to produce _____________ gas.
iii.Because aqueous acid solutions conduct electricity, they are identified as ________
iv . Acids react with bases to produce a ________ and water.v. Acids turn ____________ different colours.
2. i. Bases tend to taste _____________ and feel  ____________
ii. Like acids, aqueous basic solutions conduct _____, and are identified as______.iii.Bases react with ______________ to produce a salt and ______________.
iv . Bases turn _________________ different colours.
Acids, Bases and Salts 92 X Class3. Match the following:
a)  Plaster of Paris ( )     1)  CaO C l2
b)  Gypsum ( )     2)  NaHCO3
c)  Bleaching powder ( )     3)  Na2 CO3
d)  Baking soda ( )     4)  CaSO4 . ½ H2O
e)  Washing soda ( )     5)  CaSO4 . 2 H2O
1. The colour of methyl orange indicator in acidic medium is ………… [ ]
      a)  yellow b)  green c)  orange d)  red
2. The colour of phenolphthalein indicator in basic solution is ………… [ ]
      a)  yellow b)  green c)  pink d)  orange
3. Colour of methyl orange in alkali conditions? [ ]      a)  orange b)  yellow c)  red d)  blue
4. A solution turns red litmus blue, its pH is likely to be ………… [ ]
      a)  1 b)  4 c)  5 d)  10
5. A solution reacts with crushed egg-shells to give a gas that turns lime-water milky the solution
contains ……………… [ ]
      a)  NaC l b)  HC l c)  LiC l d)  KC l
7. If a base dissolves in water by what name is it better known? [ ]
a)  neutralization b) basic c)  acid d)  alkali
8. Which of the following substances when mixed together will produce table salt? [ ]
a)  Sodium thiosulphate and sulphur dioxide
b)  Hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide
c)  Chlorine and oxygen
d)  Nitric acid and sodium hydrogen carbonate
9. What colour would hydrochloric acid (pH=1) turn universal indicator? [ ]
a)  orange b)  purple c)  yellow d)  red
10. Which one of the following types of medicines is used for treating indigestion? [ ]
a)  antibiotic  b)  analgesic c)  antacid d)  antiseptic
11. What gas is produced when magnesium is made to react with hydrochloric acid? [ ]
a)  hydrogen        b)  oxygen c)  carbon dioxide d)  no gas is produced
12. Which of the following is the most accurate way of showing neutralization? [ ]
a)  Acid + base acid-base solution
b)  Acid + base salt + water
c)  Acid + base sodium chloride + hydrogen
d)  Acid + base neutral solutionMultiple choice questions
Free distribution by A.P. Government 93We have learnt about the reflection of light in an earlier chapter. Beauty
of the nature is made apparent with light. Light exhibits many interesting
phenomena.
Let us try to explore a few of them.
You might have observed that a coin kept at the bottom of a vessel
filled with water appears to be raised. Similarly, a lemon kept in a glass of
water appears to be bigger than its size. When a thick glass slab is placed
over some printed letters, the letters appear raised when viewed through
the glass slab.
•What could be the reasons for the above observations?
Activity 1
Take some water in a glass tumbler. Keep a pencil in it. Look at the
pencil from one side of the glass and also from the top of the glass.
•How does it look?
•Do you find any difference between the two views?
Activity 2
Go to a long wall (of length about 30 feet) facing the Sun. Go to one
end of a wall and ask your friend to bring a bright metal object near the
other end of the wall. When the object is a few inches from the wall it
appears distorted and you will see a reflected image in the wall as though
the wall were a mirror.
•Why is there an image of the object on the wall?To answer the above questions and to give reasons for the situations
mentioned we need to understand the phenomenon of refraction of light.Refraction of Light at
Plane Surfaces5Chapter

Refraction at Plane Surfaces 94 X ClassRefraction
Activity 3
Take a shallow vessel with opaque walls such as a mug. (A tin or a pan
is suitable). Place a coin at the bottom of the vessel. Move away from the
vessel until you cannot see the coin. See figure 1(b). Stand there. Ask your
friend to fill the vessel with water. When the vessel is filled with water the
coin comes back into view. See figure 1(c).
•Why are you able to see the coin when the
vessel is filled with water?
You know that the ray of light originating
from the coin, doesn’t reach your eye when the
vessel is empty (see figure1b). Hence you
couldn’t see the coin. But the coin becomesvisible to you after the vessel is filled with
water.
•How is it possible?
•Do you think that the ray reaches your eye
when the vessel is filled with water?
If yes, draw a ray diagram from the coin to
the eye. Keep in mind that the light ray travellingin a medium takes a straight line path.
•What happens to the light ray at the interface
between water and air?
•What could be the reason for this bending of
the light ray in the second instance?
The above questions can be answered by
Fermat’s principle, which states that the light
ray always travels between two points in a path
which needs the shortest possible time to cover.
Let us apply this principle to our activity.
By observing the path of the ray, it is clear
that the light ray changes its direction at the
interface separating the two media i.e, water and air. This path is chosen by
the light ray so as to minimize time of travel between coin and eye. This is
possible only if the speed of the light changes at interface of two media.
Thus we can conclude that the speed of the light changes when lightpropagates from one medium to another medium.fig-1(a)
Eye
Light ray
Opaque
walls
Coin
CoinLight ray
Opaque
wallsEye
CoinLight ray
Opaque
wallsWaterEyefig-1(b)
fig-1(c)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 95
V1
V2N
NDenser
Rarer
fig-2(b)fig-2(a)
V1
V2
NNN-normal
Rarer
DenserInterface“The process of changing speed at an interface when light travels from
one medium to another resulting in a change in direction is refraction of
light. The process of refraction involves bending of light ray except when
it is incident normally”.
Consider that light travels from medium 1with
speed v1 to medium 2 with speed v2 as shown in
figures 2(a) and (b).
•What difference do you notice in fig 2(a) and
Fig 2(b) with the respect to refracted rays?
•Is there any relation between behaviour ofrefracted rays and speeds of the light?
Experiments have showed that refraction
occurs due to change in the speed of the light in
the medium.
If v
2 is less than v1 then medium 2 is said to be
denser with respect to medium 1.
If v2  is greater than v1 then medium 2 is said to
be rarer with respect to medium 1.
If light ray enters from rarer medium to denser
medium then refracted ray moves towards the
normal drawn at the interface of separation of twomedia. When it travels from denser medium to
rarer medium it bends away from normal. We haveseen that the ray of light deviates from its path atthe interface. Draw a normal at the point ofincidence as shown in figure (3).
Let ‘i’ be the angle made by incident ray with
normal and r be the angle made by refracted ray withthe normal. These angles are called angle of
incidence and angle of refraction respectively.
To explain the process of refraction we need to
know about a constant called refractive index whichis the property of a transparent medium. Let us learnabout it.
fig-3i
rNN
N
Refraction at Plane Surfaces 96 X ClassThe extent of the change in direction that takes place when a light ray
propagates through one medium to another medium is expressed in terms
of refractive index.
Refractive index
Light travels in vacuum with a speed  nearly equal to   3x108 m/s (denoted
by letter ‘c’). The speed of  light is smaller than ‘c’ in other transparent
media.
Let ‘v’ be the speed of light in a certain medium. Then the ratio of
speed of light in vacuum to the speed of light in that medium is defined as
refractive index ‘n’. It is called absolute refractive index.
 Absolute refractive index = Speed of light in vacuum/ Speed of light
in medium.
n = c/v ...............(1)
It is a dimensionless quantity because it is a ratio of the same physical
quantities. Refractive index gives us an idea of how fast or how slow lighttravels in a medium. The speed of light in a medium is low when refractive
index of the medium is high and vice versa. The refractive index ‘n’ means
that the speed of light in that medium is nth part of speed of light in vacuum.
For example the refractive index of glass is 3/2 .Then the speed of
light in glass is (2/3) of 3 x10
8 m/s equal to 2 x108 m/s.
Table:1 Refractive indices of some material media.
Note :   From table 1, you know that  an optically denser medium may
not possess greater mass density. For example, kerosene with high
refractive index is optically denser than water although its mass density is
less than water.
•Why do different material media possess different values of refractive
Indices?Material medium Refractive index Material medium Refractive index
Air 1.0003 Canada balsam 1.53
Ice 1.31 Rock salt 1.54
Water 1.33 Carbon Diasulphide 1.63
Kerosene 1.44 Dense flint glass 1.65
Fused quartz 1.46 Ruby 1.71
Turpentine oil 1.47 Sapphire 1.77
Crown glass 1.52 Diamond 2.42
Benzene 1.50
Free distribution by A.P. Government 97•On what factors does the refractive index of a medium depend?
Refractive index depends on the following factors.(1) nature of material (2) wavelength of light used. (You will learn
about this in the chapter Human-eye-and Colourful world)
Relative refractive index
The refractive index of a medium with respect to another medium is
defined as the ratio of speed of light in the first medium to the speed of
light in the second medium. Let v1 and v2 be the speeds of light in the first
and second media respectively. Then,
Refractive index of second medium with respect to  first medium is
given by
n21 = speed of light in medium -1 / speed of light in medium – 2
n21 = v1/v2
Dividing both numerator and denominator by c we get
n21 = ( v1/c)  / ( v2/c)  = (1/ n1 ) /(1/ n2 )
D  n21 = n2  / n1....................(2)
This is called relative refractive Index. We define relative Refractive
index as follow
Aim: Obtaining a relation between angle of incidence and angle of
refraction.
Materials required: A plank, white chart, protractor, scale, small black
painted plank, a semi circular glass disc of thickness nearly  2cm, pencil
and laser light.
Procedure
Take a wooden plank which is covered with white
chart. Draw two perpendicular lines, passing through
the middle of the paper as shown in the figure 4(a).Let the point of intersection be O. Mark one line as
NN which is normal to the another line marked as
MM. Here MM represents the line drawn along theinterface of two media and NN represents the normal
drawn to this line at ‘O’.Lab Activity 1
fig-4(a)Refractive index of second medium ( n2 )
Refractive index of first medium ( n1 )Relative refractive index, ( n21 ) =
Refraction at Plane Surfaces 98 X Class
Take a protractor and place it along NN in such
way that  its centre coincides with O as shown in
figure 4(a). Then mark the angles from 00 to 900 on
both sides of the line NN as shown in figure 4(a).
Repeat the same on the other side of the line NN.
The angles should be indicated on the curved line.
Now place a semi-circular glass disc so that its
diameter coincides with the interface line (MM) and
its center coincides with the point O. Point a laser
light along NN in such a way that the light propagates from air to glassthrough the interface at point O and observe the path of laser light comingfrom other side of disc as shown in figure 4 (b). (If you cannot observe the
path of laser light put a black-coloured plank against the curved line and
observe the light point and imagine the light path).
•Is there any deviation?
Send Laser light along a line which makes15
0 (angle of incidence)
with NN and see that it passes through point O. Measure its corresponding
angle of refraction, by observing laser light coming from the other side(Circular side) of the glass slab. Note these values in table (2). Do the
same for the angles of incidence such as 20
0,300,400,500 and 600 and note
the corresponding angles of refraction.
Table 2
Find sin i, sin r for every ‘i’ and ‘r’ and evaluate sin i/ sin r for every
incident angle ‘i’.
Note :   Take the help of your teacher to find the values of sin i and
sin r for each case.
Finally, we will get the ratio sin i / sin r as a constant.
•Is this ratio equal to refractive index of glass? Why?
This ratio gives the value of refractive index of glass. In the above
experiment you might have noticed that ‘r’ is less than ‘i’ in all cases and
the refracted ray bends towards normal in each case.
•What do you conclude from these observations?fig-4(b)
i r Sin i Sin r Sin i / Sin r
Free distribution by A.P. Government 99From the above experiment we can conclude that when light ray travels
from a rarer medium (air) to a denser medium (glass) the value of r is less
than the value of ‘i’ and the refracted ray bends towards the normal.
•Can you guess what happen when light ray travels from a denser medium
to a rarer medium?
Let us take up another activity to find this.
Actitivy 4
Take a metal disk. Use a protractor and mark
angles along its edge as shown in the figure 5(a).
Arrange two straws at the centre of the disk in such
a way that they can be rotated freely about the
centre of the disc.
Adjust one of the straws to make an angle 100.
Immerse half of the disc vertically into the water,
filled in a transparent vessel. While dipping, verify
that the straw at 100 is inside the water. From the
top of the vessel try to view the straw which is inside
the water as shown in figure 5(b). Then adjust the
other straw which is outside the water until bothstraws appear to be in a single straight line.
Then take the disc out of the water and observe
the two straws on it. You will find that they are not
in a single straight line.
•Why do the straws appear to be in a straight
line when we view them from the top?
Measure the angle between the normal and second straw. Draw table
(2) again in your notebook and note the value. Do the same for various
angles. Find the corresponding angles of refraction and note them in thetable drawn. Use the data in the table and find refractive index of water. Do
not take up this activity for angles of incidence greater than 48 degrees.
You will learn the reasons for this in the following sections.
You will observe that in the above activity, ‘r’ is greater than ‘i’ in all
cases that means when light travels from water (denser) to air (rarer). It
behaves in an opposite way to that we observed in lab activity 1.
fig-5(a)
fig5(b)
Straw
Straw
Refraction at Plane Surfaces 100 X ClassFrom this activity we can generalize that when the light ray travels
from denser to rarer, it bends away from the normal and r > i.
•Can we derive the relation between the angle of incidence and the
angles of refraction theoretically?
Consider the following analogy to derive it.
Let us imagine that a person has fallen out of boat and is screaming
for help in the water at point B as shown in figure 6(a).
The line marked through point ‘X’ is the shore
line. Let us assume that we are at a point ‘A’ on the
the shore and we saw the accident. In order to save
the person we need to travel a certain distance onland and a certain distance in water. We know that,
we can run faster on land than we can swim in water.
•  What do we do to save the person?
•  Which path enables us to save the person in the
    shortest possible time?
•  Do we go in a straight line?
By careful thought we would realize that it
would be advantageous to travel a greater distance
on the land in order to decrease the distance in water
because we go much slower in water. For whatever
speeds on land and in water, the final path that onehas to follow to reach the person is ACB, and that
this path takes the shortest time of all the possible
paths (see figure 6c). If we
take any other route, it will be
longer. If we plot a graph for
the time taken to reach the girlagainst the position of any
point when we cross the shore
line, we would get a curvesomething like that shown in
figure 6(b).
Where ‘C’, the point on shore line, corresponds to the shortest of all
possible times. Let us consider a point ‘D’ on shore line which is very
close to point ‘C’ such that there is essentially no change in time betweenpath ACB and ADB.
fig-6(a)A
BX
DCtime  t
Z
fig-6(b)
A
i
rFDE
ri
C
X
B
fig-6(c)A
r At D and C angle of refraction is
taken as r because the points
C and D are assumed to be closeN
N
Free distribution by A.P. Government 101Let us try to calculate how long it would take to go from A to B by the
two paths one through point D and another through point C (see figure 6c).
First look at the paths on the land as shown in figure 6(c). If we draw aperpendicular DE; between two paths at D, we see that the path (AD) on
land is shortened by the amount EC. On the other hand, in the water, by
drawing a corresponding perpendicular CF we find that we have to go the
extra distance DF in water. In other words, we gain a time that is equal to
go through distance EC on land but we lose the time that is equal to go
extra distance DF in water. These times must be equal since we assumedthere no change in time between the two paths.
Let the time taken to travel from E to C and D to F be Δt and v
1 and v2
be the speeds of running and swimming. From figure 6(c) we get,
EC = v1  Δt and DF = v2  Δt
DEC / DF = v1/v2——————(3)
Let i and r be the angles measured between the path ACB and normal
NN, perpendicular to shore line X.
•Can you find sin i and sin r from figure 6(c)?
(Note: Take the help of your teacher)From figure 6(c), we get;
 sin i = EC / DC and sin r = DF / DC
Therefore, sin i / sin r = EC / DF ——————(4)
from equations (3) and (4), we have sin i / sin r =  v
1 / v2––—————(5)
Thus to save the person, one should take such a path to satisfy the
above equation. We used the principle of least time to derive the above
result. Hence we can apply the same for the light ray also. From (5) we
get,
sin i / sin r = v1 / v2 = n2 / n1,       (since v1 / v2 = n2 / n1)
D n1 sin i = n2 sin r.
This is called Snell’s law .
From the above discussion we can conclude that when light travels
from one medium to another, the ratio of speeds v1/v2 is equal to n2 / n1.
The light should enter at such an angle that the ratio of sine of the angles ‘i’
and ‘r’ is equal to ratio of speeds v1/v2 in the two media.
Above experiments and activities show that refraction of light occurs
according to certain laws.
Refraction at Plane Surfaces 102 X ClassFollowing are the laws of refraction.
1. The incident ray, the refracted ray and the normal to interface of
two transparent media at the point of incidence all lie in the same
plane.
2. During refraction, light follows Snell’s law
 n1 sin i = n2 sin r  (or)  sin i / sin r = constant.
•Is there any chance that angle of refraction is equal to 900? When does
this happen?
Let us find out
Total Internal Reflection
Activity 5
Use the same materials as used in lab activity 1. Place the semi circular
glass disc in such a way that its     diameter coincides with interface line
MM  and its centre coincides with point ‘O’ as we have done in lab activity.
Now send light from the curved side of the semicircular glass disc. This
means that we are making the light travel from denser medium to rarer
medium. Start with angle of incidence (i) equal to 00 i.e., along the normal
and look for the refracted ray on the other side of the disc.
•Where do you find the refracted ray?
•Does it deviate from its path when it enters the rarer medium?
You might have noticed that it doesn’t deviate.Send laser light along angles of incidence 5
0, 100, 150 etc.., and measure
the angle of refraction. Tabulate the results in table (3) as shown below
and note the values ‘i’ and ‘r’ in the table.
Table 3
•At what angle of incidence do you notice that the refracted ray grazes
the interface separating the two media (air and glass)?
You will observe that at a certain angle of incidence the refracted ray
does not come out but grazes the interface separating air and glass. Measure
the angle of incidence for to this situation. This angle of incidence is known
as critical angle .i r
Free distribution by A.P. Government 103The above results can be explained using Fermat’s principle.
Let us consider the light ray that travels from medium 1 with refractive
index n1 to medium 2 with refractive index n2.See figure (7). It is already
found that the angle of refraction is more than angle of incidence when a
light ray travels from denser(n1) to rarer medium (n2).
For the angle of incidence i, let r be the angle of refraction.
From Snell’s law
n1 sin i = n2 sin r  B  n1/n2 = sin r/ sin i
we know that, n1/n2 is greater than 1, so that sin
r/ sin i is greater than 1.So we conclude that the
angle of refraction is greater than the angle of
incidence, i.e, r is greater than i.
The angle of incidence at which the light ray,
travelling from denser to rarer medium, grazes the
interface is called critical angle for denser medium.
It is shown in figure7.
Let C be the critical angle. Then r becomes 900
we get, n1/n2 = sin 900/ sin c  B n1/n2 = 1/sin c .
We get sin c = n2/ n1 .We know that n1/n2 i.e., n12 is called refractive
index  of denser medium with respect to rarer medium
sin c = 1/n12
•Can you find the critical angle of water using the above equation?
Discuss it in your class.
•What happens to light when the angle of incidence is greater than
critical angle?
When the angle of the incidence is greater than critical angle, the light
ray gets reflected into the denser medium at the interface i.e., light never
enters the rarer medium. This phenomenon is called total internal
reflection . It is shown in figure 7.
Discuss these ideas in your class and find out the critical angle of
water.
Let us see an example on total internal reflection.
Example
A rectangular glass wedge (prism) is immersed in water
as shown in figure E-a. For what value of angle α, will the
beam of light, which is normally incident on AB, reach AC
entirely as shown in figure E-b. Take the refractive index of
water as 4/3 and the refractive index of glass as 3/2.
N
Rarer
Denser NC
fig-7
fig E-a
A Bα
C
Refraction at Plane Surfaces 104 X ClassSolution: From the geometry of figure E-b it is clear that, the angle
of incidence on the side BC is equal to α (dotted line is a normal drawn at
the point of incidence). The ray should undergo total internal reflection to
reach AC. For occurence of total internal reflection, the value of α must
be greater than the critical angle at interface of water and glass.
Let ‘C’ be the critical angle for the interface of glass and water.
From the given condition, α > C ———(1)
We know, sin C = 1/n12———(2)
n12 = n1/n2 = (3/2) /(4/3)  = 9/8.
From equation 2, we get
sin C = 8/9 B C = 620301
Hence α is greater than C = 62030|
Let us see few activities of total internal reflection.
Activity  6
Take a transparent glass tumbler and coin. Place the coin on a table
and place glass tumbler on the coin. Observe the coin from the side of theglass.
•Can you see the coin?
Now fill the glass tumbler with water and observe the coin from the
side of the glass tumbler.
•Can you see the coin?
•Explain why the coin disappears from view.
Activity  7
Take a cylindrical transparent vessel (you may use
1 L beaker). Place a coin at the bottom of the vessel.
Now pour water until you get the image of the coin
on the water surface (look at the surface of water
from a side). See figure 8.
• Can you explain why the image of the coin is
formed?
There are many interesting situations around us
which involve the phenomenon of total internal
reflection. One of that is a mirage which we witness while driving or while
walking on a road during a hot summer day.
fig E-bCB Aα
α
fig-8Coin at
bottomImage of
the coin
on the
water
surface
Free distribution by A.P. Government 105
Mirages
Mirage is an optical illusion where
it appears that water has collected on the
road at a distant place but when we getthere, we don’t find any water.
•Do you know the reason why it
appears so?
The formation of a mirage is the best
example where refractive index of a
medium varies throughout the medium.
During a hot summer day, air just
above the road surface is very hot and
the air at higher altitudes is cool. Itmeans that the temperature decreases
with height. As a result density of air
increases with height. We know thatrefractive index of air increases with
density. Thus the refractive index of air
increases with height. So, the cooler air
at the top has greater refractive index
than hotter air just above the road. Lighttravels faster through the thinner hot air
than through the denser cool air
fig-9(b): The paths of light rays when there
is no change in density of air
fig-9(a)
fig-9(c)Refractive index
decreases with depth
above it.
When the light from a tall object such as tree or from the sky passes
through a medium just above the road, whose refractive index decreases
towards ground, it suffers, refraction and takes a curved path because of
total internal reflection. See figure 9(c).
This refracted light reaches the observer in a direction shown in Figure-
9c. This appears to the observer as if the ray is reflected from the ground.
Hence we feel the illusion of water being present on road (shown in figure9a) which is the virtual image of the sky (mirage) and an inverted image of
tree on the road (shown in figure 9c).
Think and discuss
•Why should you see a mirage as a flowing water?
•Can you take a photo of a mirage?
Refraction at Plane Surfaces 106 X ClassApplications of total internal reflection
i) Brilliance of diamonds: Total internal reflection is the main reason
for brilliance of diamonds. The critical angle of a diamond is very
low(24.4o). So if a light ray enters a diamond it is
very likely to undergo total internal reflection which
makes the diamond shine.
ii) Optical fibres:  Total internal reflection is
the basic principle behind working of optical fibre.
An optical fibre is very thin fibre made of glass (or)
plastic having radius about a micrometer (10-6 m). A
bunch of such thin fibres form a light pipe.
Figure 10(a) shows the principle of light
transmission by an optical fibre. Figure 10(b)
sketches a optical fibre cable. Because of the small
radius of the fibre, light going into it makes a nearly
glancing incidence on the wall. The angle of incidence is greater than the
critical angle and hence total internal reflection takes place. The light is
thus transmitted along the fibre.
All organs of the human body are not accessible to the naked eye of
the doctor, for example intestines. The doctor inserts an optical fiber pipe
into the stomach through the mouth. Light is sent down through one set of
fibres in the pipe. This illuminates the inside of the stomach. The lightfrom the inside travels back through another set of fibres in the pipe and
the viewer gets the image at the outer end (generally fed to the computer
screen).
The other important application of fibre optics is to transmit
communication signals through light pipes. For example, about 2000telephone signals, appropriately mixed with light waves, may be
simultaneously transmitted through a typical optical fibre. The clarity of
the signals transmitted in this way is much better than other conventionalmethods.
•How does light behave when a glass slab is introduced in its path?
Let us see
Refraction Through a Glass Slab
A thin glass slab is formed when a medium is isolated from its
surroundings by two plane surfaces parallel to each other. Let us determine
position and nature of the image formed when the slab is placed in front offig-10(b)
fig-10(a)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 107an object. Let us do an activity.
Aim: Determination of position and nature of image formed by a glass
slab.
Material required: plank, chart paper, clamps, scale, pencil, thin glass
slab and pins.
Procedure:
Place a piece of chart (paper) on a plank. Clamp it. Place a glass slab in
the middle of the paper. Draw border line along the edges of the slab by
using a pencil. Remove it. You will get a figure of a rectangle. Name thevertices of the rectangle as A, B, C and D.
Draw a perpendicular at a point on the longer side (AB) of the rectangle.
Again keep the slab on paper such that it coincides with the sides of the
rectangle ABCD. Take two pins. Stick them on the perpendicular line to
AB. Take two more pins and stick them on the other side of the slab insuch a way that all pins come to view along a straight line. Remove the slab
from its place. Take out the pins. Draw a straight line by using the dots
formed by the pins such that it reaches first edge (AB) of the rectangle.You will get a long straight line.
•What does it mean?The light ray that falls perpendicular to one side of the slab surface
comes out with out any deviation.
Now take another piece of white chart on the plank. Clamp it. Place a
glass slab in the middle of the paper. Again draw a border line along the
edges of the slab by using a pencil. Remove the slab and name the vertices
of the rectangle formed as A,B,C and D. Draw a perpendicular at a point on
the longer side AB. Now draw a line, from the point ofintersection where side AB of rectangle and perpendicular
meet, in such a way that it  makes 30
0 angle with normal. This
line represents the incident ray falling on the slab and the angle
it makes with normal represents the angle of incidence.
Now place the slab on the paper in such way that it fits in
the rectangle drawn. Fix two identical pins on the line making
300 angle with normal such that they stand vertically with equal
height.  By looking at  the two pins from the other side of the
slab, fix two pins in such a way that all pins appear to be along
fig-11
iA BC Di
rr
•  pinsLab Activity 2

Refraction at Plane Surfaces 108 X Classa straight line. Remove slab and take out pins. Draw a straight line by joining
the dots formed by the pins up to the edge CD of the rectangle. This line
represents  emergent ray of the light.
Draw a perpendicular ON to the line CD where our last line drawn
meets the line CD. Measure the angle between emergent ray and normal.
This is called angle of emergence. (Check your drawing with the figure
11).
•Is the line formed a straight line?
•Are the angles of incidence and emergence equal?
•Are the incident and emergent rays parallel?
You will notice an important result that the incident and emergent rays
are parallel.
•Can you find the distance between the parallel rays?
The distance between the parallel rays is called lateral shift. Measure
this shift. Repeat the experiment for different angles of incidence and
tabulate the values of angle of incidence and shift corresponding to each
angle of incidence in table (4).
•Can you find any relation
between the angle of incidenceand shift?
•Can you find the refractive
index of the slab?
Let us find the refractive
index of the slab.
Activity 8
Measure the thickness of the slab. Note it in your notebook. Take a
white chart and fix it on the table. Take the slab and place it in the middle
of the chart. Draw its boundary. Remove the slab from its
place. The lines form a rectangle. Name the vertices as A,B,C
and D. Draw a perpendicular to the longer line AB of therectangle at any point on it. Place slab again in the rectangle
ABCD. Take a pin. Place at a point P in such a way that its
length is parallel to the AB on the perpendicular line at a
distance of 15cm from the slab. Now take another pin and by
looking at the first pin from the other side of the slab try to
place the pin so that it forms a straight line with the first pin.Remove the slab and observe the positions of the pins.Agle of Inciddene ShiftTable 4
Glass
slab
fig-12P
Q
B
DA
C
Free distribution by A.P. Government 109•When light travels from one medium to another, its direction changes at the interface. The
phenomenon of changing direction at the interface of the two media is known as refraction.
•Refraction is a result of change in speed of light at the interface.
•Absolute refractive index = Speed of light in vacuum/ Speed of light in medium B n=c/v.
•Relative refractive index , n21 = v1/v2 = n2/n1 .
•Snell’s law is given by, n1 sin i = n2 sin r .
•The angle of incidence, at which the light ray travelling from denser to rarer medium grazes theinterface, is called the critical angle for those media. sin C = n
2/ n1 , where n1  is the refractive
index of denser medium and  n2  is the refractive index of rarer medium. (n1>n2)
•When the angle of incidence is greater than the critical angle, the light ray is reflected into densermedium at interface. This phenomenon is called total internal reflection.
1. Why is it difficult to shoot a fish swimming in water? (AS1)
2. The speed of the light in a diamond is 1, 24, 000 km/s. Find the refractive index of diamond if
the speed of light in air is 3,00,000 km/s.  (AS1)                                                    (Ans: 2.42)
3. Refractive index of glass relative to water is 9/8. What is the refractive index of water relative
to glass? (AS1)  (Ans: 8/9)
4. The absolute refractive index of water is 4/3. What is the critical angle? (AS1) (Ans: 48.5
0)
5. Determine the refractive index of benzene if the critical angle is 420.(AS1)       (Ans: 1.51)
6. Explain the formation of mirage? (AS1)What we have learnt
Improve your learning
•Are they in the same line?
Draw a perpendicular line from the second pin to the line on which
first pin is placed. Call the intersection point Q. Find the distance between
P and Q. We may call it vertical shift.
•Is this shift independent of distance of first pin from slab?
To find this, do the same activity for another distance of the pin from
the slab. You will get the same vertical shift. We could use a formula to
find out refractive index of the glass.
R.I  =  Thickness of the slab / (thickness of slab – vertical shift)
Key words
Refraction, Incident ray, Refracted ray, Angle of incidence, Angle of
Refraction,  Absolute refractive index, Relative refractive index, Snell’s law,
Critical angle, Total internal Reflection, Mirage, Shift, Optical fibre.
Refraction at Plane Surfaces 110 X Class7. How do you verify experimentally that sin i /sin r is a constant? (AS1)
8. Explain the phenomenon of total internal reflection with one or two activities. (AS1)
9. How do you verify experimentally that the angle of refraction is more than angle of incidence
when light rays travel from denser to rarer medium. (AS1)
10. Take a bright metal ball and make it black with soot in a candle flame. Immerse it in water. How
does it appear and why? (Make hypothesis and do the above experiment). (AS2)
11. Take a glass vessel and pour some glycerine into it and then pour water up to the brim. Take a
quartz glass rod. Keep it in the vessel. Observe the glass rod from the sides of the glass vessel.
•What changes do you notice?   •  What could be the reasons for these changes?(AS2)
12. Do activity-7 again. How can you find critical angle of water? Explain your steps briefly. (AS3)
13. Collect the values of refractive index of the following media.  (AS4)
Water, coconut oil, flint glass, crown glass, diamond, benzene and hydrogen gas.
14. Collect information on working of optical fibres. Prepare a report about various uses of optical
fibres in our daily life. (AS4)
15. Take a thin thermocol sheet. Cut it in circular discs of different
radii like 2cm, 3cm, 4cm, 4.5cm, 5cm etc and mark centers
with sketch pen. Now take needles of length nearly 6cm. Pina needle to each disc at its centre vertically. Take water in a
large opaque tray and place the disc with 2cm radius in such a
way that the needle is inside the water as shown in fig-Q15.Now try to view the free end (head) of the needle from surface of the water.
•Are you able to see the head of the needle?
Now do the same with other discs of different radii. Try to see the head of the needle, each
time.
Note: the position of your eye and the position of the disc on water surface should not be
changed while repeating the activity with other discs.
•At what maximum radius of disc, were you not able to see the free end of the needle?
•Why were you not able to view the head of the nail for certain radii of the discs?
•Does this activity help you to find the critical angle of the medium (water)?
•Draw a diagram to show the passage of light ray from the head of the nail in different
situations. (AS4)
16. Explain the refraction of light through a glass slab with a neat ray diagram. (AS5)
17. Place an object on the table. Look at the object through the transparent glass slab. You will
observe that it will appear closer to you. Draw a ray diagram to show the passage of light ray
in this situation. (AS5)
18. What is the reason behind the shining of diamonds and how do you appreciate it? (AS6)
19. How do you appreciate the role of Fermat principle in drawing ray diagrams. (AS6)fig-Q15

Free distribution by A.P. Government 111Multiple choice questions20. A light ray is incident on air-liquid interface at 450and is refracted at 300. What is the refractive
index of the liquid? For what angle of incidence will the angle between reflected ray and refracted
ray be 900?  (AS7)                                                                      (Ans: 1.414, 54.70)
21. Explain why a test tube immersed at a certain angle in a tumbler of water appears to have a
mirror surface for a certain viewing position? (AS7)
22. What is the angle of deviation produced by a glass slab? Explain with ray diagram. (AS7)
23. In what cases does a light ray not deviate at the interface of two media?(AS7)24. A ray of light travels from an optically denser to rarer medium. The critical angle of the two
media is ‘c’. What is the maximum possible deviation of the ray?  (AS7)                  (Ans: π-2c)
25.  When we sit at a camp fire, objects beyond the fire are seen swaying. Give the reason for it.
(AS7)
26.  Why do stars appear twinkling? (AS7)
27. Why does a diamond shine more than a glass piece cut to the same shape? (AS7)
1. At critical angle of incidence, the angle of refraction is ................
2. n
1 sin i = n2 sin r, is called..................
3. Speed of light in vaccum is ......................
4. Total internal reflection takes place when a light ray propagates from .......... to ............. medium.5. The refractive index of a transparent material is 3/2. The speed of the light in that medium is
..............
6. Mirage is an example of .....................
1. Which of the following is Shell’s law. [ ]
a) n
1 sin i = sin r/ n2b) n1/n2 = sin r / sin i
c) n2 / n1 = sin r / sin i d) n2 sin i = constant
2. The refractive index of glass with respect to air is 2. Then the critical angle of glass-air interface
is .................. [ ]
a) 0ob) 45oc) 30od) 60o
3. Total internal reflection takes place when the light ray travels from............... [ ]
a) rarer to denser medium b) rarer to rarer medium
c) denser to rarer medium d) denser to denser medium
4. The angle of deviation produced by the glass slab is ................... [ ]
a) 0ob) 20oc) 90o
d) depends on the angle formed by the light ray and normal to the slabFill in the blanks
Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces 112 X ClassIt is a common observation that some people use spectacles for
reading. The watch repairer uses a small magnifying glass to see tiny parts
of a watch.
•Have you ever touched a magnifying glass with your hand?
•Have you touched the glass in the spectacles used for reading with
your hand?
•Is it a plane or curved surface?
•Is it thicker in the middle or at the edge?
We have learnt about refraction of light at a plane surface in the previous
chapter. Now let us understand refraction of light at curved surfaces.
Let us do an activity to understand refraction of light at curved surfaces.
Refraction of light at a curved surface
Activity 1
Draw an arrow of length 4 cm using a black sketch pen on a thick sheet
of paper. Take an empty cylindrical-shaped transparent vessel such as glass
tumbler. Keep it on the table. Ask your friend to bring the sheet of paper
on which arrow was drawn behind the vessel while you look at it from the
other side (The arrow mark should be in horizontal position).
•What do you see?You will see a diminished (small-sized) image of the arrow
•Why do you see a diminished image?
•Is the image real or virtual?
•Can you draw a ray diagram showing how it is formed?Refraction of Light at
Curved Surfaces6Chapter

Free distribution by A.P. Government 113
Ask your friend to fill the vessel with water. Look at the figure of
arrow from the same position as before.
•What do you see now?
•Do you get an inverted image?
•How could this happen?
In the first case, when the vessel is empty, light from the arrow refracts
at the curved interface, moves through the glass and enters into air then it
again undergoes refraction on the opposite curved surface of the vessel(at the other end from where we are looking) and comes out into the air. Inthis way light travels through two media and comes out of the vessel andforms a diminished image.
In the second case, light enters the curved surface,
moves through water, comes out of the glass  and forms
an inverted image.
When the vessel is filled with water, there is a
curved interface between two different media (air andwater). Assume that the refractive indices of both waterand glass are the same (they really are not equal). Thissetup of air and water separated by a curved surface isshown in figure 1.
•What happens to a ray that is incident on a curved surface separating
the two media?
•Are the laws of refraction still valid?
Let us find out. Consider a curved surface seperating two different
media as shown in figure 2. The centre of the sphere,
of which curved surface is a part, is called as centre of
curvature . It is denoted by letter ‘C’.
Any line drawn from the centre of curvature to a
point on the curved surface  becomes normal to thecurved surface at that point. The direction of the normalchanges from one point to another point on the curvedsurface. The centre of the curved surface is called the pole (P) of the
curved surface. The line that joins the  centre of curvature and the pole
is called ‘principal axis’ .
•How do rays bend when they are incident on a curved surface?fig-1
fig-2Air Water
Curved
surface
PCLight
raysNormal
Principal
axis
Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces 114 X Class
As in the case of plane surfaces, a ray will bend towards the normal if
it travels from a rarer to denser medium and it bends away from the normal
if it travels from a denser to a rarer medium .
Let us see how we can draw ray diagrams for certain useful cases.
•What happens to a ray that travels along the principal axis? Similarly, a
ray that travels through the centre of curvature?
According to Snell’s law the ray which travels along
the normal drawn to the surface does not deviate from
its path. Hence both rays mentioned above         travelalong the normal (see figure 3), so they do not deviate.
•  What happens to a ray travelling parallel to the
principal axis?
Observe the following figures 4a, 4b, 4c, and 4d.
In all the cases as represented by the diagrams, the
incident ray is parallel to the principal axis.
Case1: A ray travelling parallel to the principal axis
strikes a convex surface and passes from a rarer
medium to denser medium. (see figure 4a)
Case2: A ray travelling parallel to the principal axis
strikes a convex surface and passes from a densermedium to rarer medium. (see figure 4b)
Case3: A ray travelling parallel to the principal axis
strikes a concave surface and passes from a denser
medium to rarer medium. (see figure 4c)
Case4: A ray travelling parallel to the principal axis
strikes a concave surface and passes from a rarer
medium to denser medium. (see figure 4d)
•What difference do you notice in the refracted rays
in 4a and 4b?fig-3
fig-4(a)
fig-4(b)
fig-4(c) fig-4(d)C
P Ray passing
thorugh
poleRay passing
thorugh C
Normal
Rarer
DenserC
C
DenserNormal
Rarer
C
Rarer DenserNormal
C
Denser RarerNormal
Free distribution by A.P. Government 115
•What could be the reason for that difference?
•What difference do you notice in refracted rays in figure 4c and 4d?
•What could be the reasons for that difference?
You might have noticed that in figures 4(a) and 4 (c) the refracted ray
reaches a particular point on the principal axis. In figures 4(b) and 4(d) the
refracted ray moves away from the principal axis. When you extend therefracted ray backwards along the ray as shown in 4b and 4d, the  extended
ray intersects the principal axis at some point. The point where refracted
ray intersects the axis in all the above cases is called the  focal point .
You might have observed that a lemon in a glass of water appears bigger
than its actual size, when viewed from the sides of tumbler.
•How can you explain this change in the size of lemon?
•Is the lemon that appears bigger in size an image of lemon or is it the
real lemon?
•Can you draw a ray diagram to explain this phenomenon?
Let us find out.
Image formation
Consider a curved surface separating two media of refractive indices
n1 and n2 ( figure 5) . A point object is placed on the principal axis at point
O. The ray, which travels along the principal axis passes through the pole
undeviated. The second ray, which forms an angle α with principal axis,
meets the interface (surface) at A. The angle of incidence is θ1. The ray
bends and passes through the second medium along the line AI. The angleof refraction is θ
2. The two refracted rays
meet at I and the image is formed there.
Let the angle made by the second
refracted ray with principal axis be γ and
the angle between the normal and
principal axis be β. (see figure 5)
In figure 5,
PO is the object distance which we
denote as ‘u’
PI is image distance which we denote
as ‘v’
PC is radius of curvature which we denote as ‘R’
n1, n2 are refractive indices of two media.
Can you establish any relation between the above mentioned quantities?fig-5CN
O P
n1n2A
Iαβ γθ1 θ2
Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces 116 X ClassIn the triangle ACO,      θ1 = α + β
and in the triangle ACI,  β  = θ2 + γ  B  β – γ = θ2
According to Snell’s law, we know
n1 sin θ1 = n2 sin θ2
substituting the  values of θ1 and θ2, we get,
n1 sin(α+ β) = n2 sin(β- γ) ................. (1)
If the rays move very close to the principal axis, the rays can be treated
as parallel and are called paraxial rays . Then the angles α, β and γ become
very small. This approximation is called paraxial approximation .
sin (α+ β)  =  α+β  and sin ( β- γ)  = β- γ
Substituting in equation (1)
n1 (α+ β)  = n2 (β- γ)  B n1α + n1 β = n2 β – n2 γ ................(2)
since all angles are small, we can write
tan α  =  AN/NO = α
tan β  =  AN/NC = β
tan γ  =  AN/NI = γ
Substitute these in equation (2), we get,
n1 AN/NO + n1 AN/NC = n2 AN/NC –  n2 AN/NI ............... (3)
As the rays move very close to the principal axis, the point N coincides
with pole of the interface (P). Therefore NI, NO, NC can be replaced by
PI, PO and PC respectively.
After substituting these values in equation (3), we get,
n1/PO +  n1/PC = n2/PC – n2/PI
n1/PO + n2/PI = (n2- n1) /PC ................(4)
Equation (4) shows the relation between refractive indices of two
media, object distance, image distance and radius of curvature.
The above equation is true for the case we considered. We can generalize equation (4) if we use the following sign convention.
For all purposes of applications of refraction at curved surfaces and
through lenses following conventions are used.
–  All distances are measured from the pole (or optic centre).
–  Distances measured along the direction of the incident light ray
are taken as positive
–  Distances measured opposite to the direction of the incident light
ray are taken as negative
– The heights measured vertically above from the points on axis are
taken as positive
Free distribution by A.P. Government 117
– The heights measured vertically down from points on axis are taken
as negative.
Here PO is called the object distance  (u)
          PI is called the image distance (v)
          PC is called radius of curvature (R)
According to sign convention mentioned above, we have
PO = -u ;  PI = v ;  PC = R
Substituting these values in equation (4) we get,
n2/v - n1/u = (n2-n1 ) /R ....................... (5)
This formula can also be used for plane surfaces. In the case of a plane
surface, radius of curvature (R) approaches infinity. Hence 1/R becomes
zero. Substituting this in equation 5, we get formula for the plane surfaces
n2/v - n1/u = 0 B n2/v = n1/u
NOTE:  The distances u and v are measured from the plane interface.
Let us consider the following examples.
Example 1
A bird is flying down vertically towards the surface of water in a pond
with constant speed. There is a fish inside the water. If that fish is exactlyvertically below the bird, then the bird will appear to the fish to be:
a. farther away than its actual distance.
b. closer than its actual distance.c. moving faster than its actual speed.
d. moving slower than its actual speed.
Which of the four options are true? How can you prove it?
Solution:  For refraction at a plane surface,
we use n2/v = n1/u ..................(1)
Let x be the height of the bird above the water surface at an
instant and n be the refractive index of water.
n1= refractive index of air,
Then n1 =1, n2 = n, u= - x and let v = -y, (see figure E-1)
Substituting these values in equation (1)
n/(-y) = 1/(- x) B y = n x
In the above equation, we know that n is greater than 1. Hence
y is greater than x. Thus the bird appears to the fish to be farther
away than its actual distance. We have assumed that bird is flying verticallyfig-E1I
O
x y
Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces 118 X Classdown with constant speed. For the observer on the ground, bird appears
that it has covered ‘x’ distance for certain time. But for fish, it appears that
bird has covered a distance ‘y’ in the same time. As y is greater than x , wecan conclude that the speed of the bird, observed by the fish, is greater
than its actual speed.
So, options (a) and (c) are correct.
Example 2
A transparent sphere of radius R and refractive index n is kept in air. At
what distance  from the surface of the sphere should a point object be
placed on the principal axis so as to form a real
image at the same distance from the second
surface of the sphere?
Solution: From the symmetry of figure E2,
the rays must pass through the sphere parallel
to the principal axis.
From the figure,
u = -x, v= ∞ (refracted ray is parallel to the optical axis after refraction
at first surface)
n1 =1 and n2 = n, (where n1 is refractive index of air)
Using n2/v –n1/u = (n2-n1)/R
n/ ∞ - 1/ (- x) = (n-1)/R B 1/x = (n-1)/R
B x = R/(n – 1)
Object distance from the first surface of the sphere is x= R/(n-1)
Example 3
A transparent (glass) sphere has a small, opaque dot at its centre. Does
the apparent position of the dot appear to be the same as its actual positionwhen observed from outside?
Solution:  Let refractive index of glass n1= n
refractive index of air n2 = 1
Then u = –R (radius of sphere) ; Radius of curvature R = –R
Using n2/v –n1/u = (n2-n1)/R
        1/v – n/(-R) = (1-n)/(-R) B 1/v + n/R = (n–1)/R
After solving this equation, we get
 Image distance v = –Rfig-E2
xx
ROI
Free distribution by A.P. Government 119Thus we can say that the image distance and object distance are equal
and that the apparent position of dot is the same as its actual position.
It is independent of the refractive index of the material of the sphere.
_______________
Till now we have discussed refraction of light at a single curved surface
either convex  or concave. Let us suppose that a transparent material has
two curved surfaces.
•What happens to the light ray when a transparent material with two
curved surfaces is placed in its path?
•Have  you heard about lenses?
•How does a light ray behave when it is passed through a lens?
Let us learn about refraction of light through lenses.
Lenses
A lens is formed when a transparent material is bounded by two surfaces
of which one (or) both surfaces are spherical. That is a lens is bounded by
atleast one curved surface. Lenses can be of various types. Some typical
lenses along with their names are shown in figure 6.
figure  6 : Different types of lenses
A lens may have two spherical surfaces bulging outwards. Such a lens
is called double convex lens (Biconvex lens, see figure 6(a) ). It is thick at
the middle as compared to edges.
Similarly, a double concave lens is bounded by two spherical surfaces
curved inwards. (Biconcave lens, see figure 6(b) ). It is thin at the middle
and thicker at the edges.
Observe the 6(c), 6(d) and 6(e) to understand structure of Plano-
Convex lens, Plano-Concave lens; Concavo-Convex lens.fig-6(a): fig-6(b):  fig-6(c): fig-6(d): fig-6(e):
Biconvex Biconcave Plano-convex Plano-concave Concavo-convex

Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces 120 X Class
Here we are concerned only with thin lenses i.e. the thickness of the
lens is negligible.
Let us learn the terminology used in the case of lenses.
Each curved surface of a lens is part of a sphere. The
centre of the sphere which contains the part of the curved
surface is called centre of curvature . It is denoted by a
letter ‘C’. If a lens contains two curved surfaces then their
centres of curvature are denoted as C1 and C2.The distance
between the centre of curvature and curved surface is
called radius of curvature (R) . Radii of curvature are
represented by R1 and R2 respectively. Let us consider a
double convex lens as shown in figure 7.
The line joining the points C1 and C2 is called principal axis . The
midpoint of a thin lens  is called optic centre of lens (P).
Focal length of the lens
A parallel beam of light incident on a lens converges to a point as
shown in figure 8(a) or seems to emanate from a point on the principal
axis as shown in figure 8(b). The point of convergence (or) the point from
which rays seem to emanate is called focal point  or focus  (F). Every lens
has two focal points. The distance between the focal point and optic centre
is called the focal length  of lens denoted by ‘f’.
For drawing ray diagrams related to lenses we represent convex lens
with a symbol  R and concave lens with   . See figures 8(c) and 8(d).fig-8(a) fig-8(b)>>>>>—————<<<<<fig-7R2R1
C1P C2
fig-8(c) fig-8(d)C2C1 F1F2C1 C2F2F1
C2 C1 F1F2C1C2F2F1
Free distribution by A.P. Government 121
•How does the lens form an image?
To know the formation of image by lenses, we need to know the
behavior of light rays when they meet a lens.
Though we know that the lens has two surfaces; while drawing ray
diagrams, we can consider the lens as a single surface element because we
assume that the thickness of the lens is very small and show the net
refraction at only one of the surfaces, as shown in the figure 8(c) and 8(d).
Behaviour of certain light rays when they are incident on a lens
The behaviour of a light ray when it passes through a lens can be
understood by observing its behaviour in the following situations:
Situation I:  Ray passing along the principal axis
Any ray passing along the principal axis is undeviated.
(see Figures 9a and 9b)
Situation II: Ray passing through the optic centre.
Any ray passing through the optic centre is also
undeviated. (see Figure 10a and 10b)
Situation III: Rays travelling parallel to the principal axis.
We know that the rays passing parallel to the principal axis converge
at the focus or appear to diverge from the focus as shown in figure 8(c)
and 8(d).
•If we allow a light ray to pass through the focus, which path does it
take?
Situation IV: Ray passing through focus.
Light rays obey the principle of least time. Hence the ray passing
through the focus will take a path parallel to principal axis after refraction.
(see Figure 11(a) and 11(b) )fig-9(a)
fig-9(b)
fig-10(a) fig-10(b)C2 C1F1F2
C1C2F2 F1
C1C2F2 F1C2 C1F1F2
C2C1 F1F2C1C2 F2F1
fig-11(a) fig-11(b)
Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces 122 X Class
•What happens when parallel rays of light fall on a lens making some
angle with the principal axis?
Let us observe the following figures
When parallel rays, making an angle with principal axis, fall on a lens,
as shown in figures 12(a) and 12(b), the rays converge at a point or appear
to diverge from a point lying on the focal plane. Focal plane is the planeperpendicular to the principal axis at the focus.
Rules to draw ray diagrams for image formation by lenses
Let us learn a few basic rules to draw ray diagrams to locate the position
of images.
For drawing a ray diagram to find position and size of the image formed
by lens for any position of object on the principal axis you need to follow
the rules mentioned below:
For locating position and to find the size of image, we need two rays
out of four rays that were mentioned in the situations I to IV .
- Select a point on the object placed at a point on the principal axis.
- Draw two rays that were chosen by you from rays mentioned in
situations I to IV.
- Extend both rays to intersect at a point. This point gives position
of the image.
- Draw a normal from point of intersection to the principal axis.
- Length of this normal represents the size of the image.
Observe the following diagrams. They represent image formation by a
convex lens for various positions of the object.
1. Object at infinity
•What do you mean by an object at infinity?
•What type of rays fall on the lens?You know that the rays falling on the lens from an object at infinity are
parallel to the principal axis.fig-12(a) fig-12(b)C2C1F1F2C1C2F2 F1
Free distribution by A.P. Government 123
They converge to the focal point. So a point sized image is formed at
the focal point. This can be seen in figures 8(a).
2. Object placed beyond the centre of curvature on the principal axis
In figure (13) you notice that when
object is placed beyond the centre of
curvature (C2), a real, inverted  and
diminished  image is formed on the
principal axis between the points F1 and C1.
In figure (13) we have chosen two rays,
one ray passing parallel to the principal axis and another ray passing through
the optic centre to locate the position of the image.
Try to draw ray diagram using the pair of rays, one passing parallel to
the axis another passing through the focus.
3. Object placed at the centre of curvature
When an object is placed at the centre
of curvature (C2) on the principal axis, you
will get an image at C1 which is real,
inverted  and of the same size  as that of
object. See figure 14.
4. Object placed between the centre of curvature and focal point
When an object is placed between
centre of curvature (C2) and focus (F2), you
will get an image which is real, inverted
and magnified . See figure 15. The image
will form beyond C1.
5. Object located at the focal pointWhen an object is placed at focus (F
2),
the image will be at infinity. See figure 16.
When the image is formed at an infinitedistance away we can not discuss the size
and nature of the image.fig-13
C2C1F1
F2Object
Image
fig-14C2C1F1
F2Object
Image
fig-15C2C1 F1
F2Object
Image
fig-16C2C1F1
F2Object
Image at
infinity
Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces 124 X Class
6. Object placed between focal point and optic centre
If we place an object between focus and optic
centre, we will get an image which is virtual , erect
and magnified .
From the ray diagram shown in figure 17, you
will notice that the image formed is a virtual , erect
and is formed on the same side of the lens where
the object is placed. The size of the image is larger than that of the object.
It is a magnified image .
In the above situation of image formation, we understand two things:
1. As the image formed is virtual, we can see it with our eyes. In all other
cases the image is real which we can’t see with our eyes but can be
viewed if the image is captured on a screen.
2. A magnified virtual image is formed on the same side of the lens where
the object is placed. Thus the image you are seeing through a lens is
not real, it is a virtual image of the object.
This particular behaviour of convex lens helps to construct a
microscope, which gives a magnified image. You might remember that the
magnification of the virtual image is possible only when the object is at
the distance less than the focal length of the lens.
Till now we have drawn ray diagrams for various positions of object
placed on principal axis using convex lens. Draw ray diagram for an objectplaced between C
1 and F1 for a concave lens.
•What do you notice?
Verify your ray diagram with the ray diagram
we have drawn for a convex lens. See figure 18.
Try to draw ray diagrams for other positions of
an object. You will notice that irrespective of the
position of object, on the principal axis, you will
get an erect, virtual image , diminished in size  in between the focal point
and optic centre for concave lens.
Let us see a few examples of ray diagrams
Example 4
Draw a ray diagram to locate the position of image when a point source
(S) is placed on optical axis MN of a convex lens, in such a way that it is
beyond focal point (F). See figure E(4).
Solution
- Draw a perpendicular line to principal axis passing through the
focus (FI).fig-17C2C1 F1
F2
ObjectImage
fig-18C1C2 F2
F1Object
Image
Free distribution by A.P. Government 125
- Draw a ray from point source (S) in any
direction to meet lens at point (PI).
- Now draw another line parallel to the ray
drawn from the point source (S) such
that it passes through the optic centre
(P); This line intersects the normal at point FO.
- Now draw a line passing from point PI  to pass through the point FO
such that it meets principal axis at a point say (I).
- ‘I’ is the image point for the point source (S).
Example 5
Complete the ray diagram to
show the paths of the rays after
refraction through the lenses shownin the figures E5(a) and E5(b)?
Solution
Follow the steps mentioned in Example (4) to complete the ray
diagrams.
You will notice that the paths of the rays are shown in figures E5(c)
and 5(d).
_______________
•Can we realise in practice the results obtained in the ray diagrams
when we perform experiments with a lens?
Let us see
Activity 2
Take a v-stand and place it on a long (nearly 2m) table at the middle.
Place a convex lens on the v-stand. Imagine the principal axis of the lens.
Light a candle and ask your friend to take the candle far away from the lens
along the principal axis. Adjust a screen (a sheet of white paper placed
perpendicular to the axis) which is on other side of the lens until you getan image on it.
•Why are we using a screen to view this image? Why don’t we see it
directly with our eye?fig-E(4)SF0
F M P F/ INP/
fig-E5(a)SF
F MF/
F F/
fig-E5(b)
fig-E5(c)F
F/
fig-E5(d)FF/
Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces 126 X ClassMeasure the distance of the image from the v-stand of lens and also
measure the distance between the  candle and stand of lens.
Record the values in a  table 1.
Now place the candle at a distance
of 60 cm from the lens, such that the
flame of the candle lies on the principalaxis of the lens. Try to get an image ofthe candle flame on the other side on ascreen. Adjust the screen till you get aclear image. Measure the image
distance (v) from lens and record the values of  ‘u’ and ‘v’ in table 1. Repeatthis for various object distances like 50 cm, 40 cm, 30 cm, etc. Measureimage distances in all the cases and note them in table 1.
•Could you get an image on the screen for every object distance?
•Why don’t you get an image for certain object distances?
•Can you find the minimum limiting object distance for obtaining a
real image?
•What do you call this minimum limiting object distance for real images?
When you do not get an image on the screen, try to see the image with
your eye directly from the place of the screen.
•Could you see the image?
•What type of image do you see?You will see a magnified image on the same side where we kept the
object. This is a virtual  image of the object which we cannot capture on
the screen.•Can you find the image distance of this virtual image?
In table-1, you got different values of ‘v’ for various position of candle
(u).
•Could you find focal length of the lens from the values recorded in
table-1?
•Can we establish a relation between ‘u’, ‘v’ and ‘f’?
Let us find out.
Consider an object OO
I placed on the principal axis in front of a convex
lens as shown in figure(19). Let III  be the real image formed by the lens on
the other side of it. Observe the figure(19).
•How is the image formed?Object
distance (u)Image
distance (v)Focal
length (f)Table 1
Free distribution by A.P. Government 127
Lens formula
The ray, starting at OI  and moving parallel to the principal axis and
which falls on the lens, should pass through the focal point F1 as shown in
figure (19). To locate the point of image (II)  for the object point (OI),
consider another ray that passes through the optic centre P. We know that
any ray passing through the optic centre P will not deviate.
The ray starting from OI  and passing through optic centre P, will meet
the refracted ray (first ray) at the point II. This point is the image of the
point OI of the object. Similarly, the image of the point O on the principal
axis is formed at point I on the principal axis (see Figure 19). We get the
inverted image III of object OOI.
PO, PI and PF1 are the object distance, image distance and focal length
respectively. From  figure 19, triangle PPIF1 and triangle F1III  are similar
triangles,
BPPI/III = PF1/F1I .................(1)
But from the figure 19,
F1I = PI – PF1
substituting F1I in equation (1) above, we get
PPI/III = PF1/(PI – PF1) .................(2)
We have another set of similar triangles OOIP and  PIII.
From these triangles we get, OOI/III = PO/PI
      but from figure (19), OOI = PPI, hence
we have
PPI/III = PO/PI .................(3)
From (2) and (3), we get
PO/PI =  PF1/(PI-PF1)
PI/PO = (PI-PF1)/PF1
PI/PO = PI/PF1 – 1
On dividing the equation by PI, we get
1/PO = 1/PF1 -1/PI
1/PO + 1/PI = 1/PF1.................(4)
The above equation is derived for a particular case of the object while
using a convex lens. To convert this into a general equation, we need to
use the sign convention.
According to the sign convention
PO = -u ;  PI = v ;  PF1 = f
Substituting these values in equation 4, we get
1/v – 1/u = 1/ffig-19F1
F2O P
I/IP/O/
Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces 128 X Class
This equation is called lens formula . It can be used for any lens. But
remember to use the  sign convention while using this equation.
We have ‘u’ and ‘v’ values in table – 1 that were measured during activity
– 2. Find focal length of the lens from the values of the table for each set
of values of ‘u’ and ‘v’.
•Is the focal length same for each set of values?
You might have noticed that irrespective of object distance and image
distance, you will get same focal length. If you do not get the same value
of focal length, there may be some experimental error while doing theexperiment. In such a case, find the average of all the values. This will be
equal to the focal length of the lens.
Let us see an example
Example 6
An electric lamp and a screen are placed on the table, in a line at a
distance of 1m. In what positions of convex lens of focal length of f = 21
cm will the image of lamp be sharp?
Solution
Let ‘d’ be distance between the lamp and screen and ‘x’ be the distance
between lamp and lens. From figure E-6, we have u = - x and v = d- x
By substituting these in lens formula,
We get
1/f = 1/(d- x) + 1/ x
After solving this equation, we
get
x2 – dx + fd = 0
It is a quadratic equation. Hence we get two solutions. The solutions
of the above equation are
           _______
x = [d + √(d2-4fd)] / 2 .................(1)
Given that f = 21cm and d= 1m =100cm.
Substituting these values in equation 1, we get
x1 =70 cm and x2 = 30cm.
NOTE: Image of the lamp can be sharp only when f is less than or
equal to 25cm.
Discuss the reason for this using equation (1). Take the help of your
teacher.
_______________fig-E(6)d-x
dxScreen
Lamp
Free distribution by A.P. Government 129•On what factors does the focal length of the lens depend?
Let us find out.
Activity 3
Take the same lens that was used in activity 2. Note the average
focal length of the lens that was calculated in the activity. Take a
cylindrical vessel such as glass tumbler. Its height must be muchgreater than the focal length of the lens. (We require the vessel
which has a length (depth) nearly equal to four times of the focal
length of lens). Keep a black stone inside the vessel at its bottom.
Now pour water into the vessel up to a height such that the height
of the water level from the top of the stone is greater than focal
length of lens. Now dip the lens horizontally using a circular lens holderas shown in the figure (20) above the stone. Set the distance between stone
and lens that is equal to or less than focal length of lens measured in activity
2. Now look at the stone through the lens. (Do this in open ground)
•Can you see the image of the stone?
•If  Yes / Not, why? Give your reasons.
You can see the image of the stone if the distance between lens and
stone is less than the focal length of the lens (in air).  Now increase the
distance between lens and stone until you cannot see the image of the
stone.
•What do you conclude from this activity?
•Does the focal length of the lens depend on surrounding medium?You have dipped the lens to a certain height which is greater than the
focal length of lens in air. But you can see the image (when lens is raised
further, you could not see the image). This shows that the focal length of
lens has increased in water. Thus we conclude that the focal length of lensdepends upon the surrounding medium in which it is kept.
Lens maker’s formula
Imagine a point object ‘O’ placed on the principal axis of the thin lens
as shown in figure 21. Let this lens be placed in a medium of refractive
index na and let refractive index of
lens medium be nb.
Consider a ray, from ‘O’ which is
incident on the convex surface of the
lens with radius of curvature R1 at A
as shown in figure 21.
fig-20Lens Circular
lens
holder Stone
uxvOIna na
nb
PA B
R1R2
fig-21Q
Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces 130 X ClassThe incident ray refracts at A.
Let us assume that, it forms image at Q, if there were no concave
surface.
From the figure(21), Object distance PO = –u;
Image distance v = PQ = x
Radius of curvature R = R1
n1 = na and n2 = nb
Substitute the above values in the equation, n2 / v - n1 / u = (n2-n1) / R
B  nb / x + na / u = (nb-na) / R1...................(1)
But the ray that has refracted at A suffers another refraction at B on the
concave surface with radius of curvature  (R2). At B the ray is refracted and
reaches I on the principal axis.
The image Q of the object due to the convex surface is taken as object
for the concave surface. So, we can say that I is the image of Q for concave
surface. See figure 21.
Object distance u = PQ =  + x
Image distance PI =  v
Radius of curvature R = –R2
For refraction, the concave surface of the lens is considered as
medium-1 and surrounding medium is considered as medium2. Hence the
suffixes of refractive indices interchange. Then we get,
n1 = nb and n2 = na
Substituting the above values in equation n2 / v - n1 / u = (n2-n1) / R
na / v - nb / x = (na-nb) / (-R2) ...................(2)
By adding (1) and (2) we get,
B  na / v + na / u = (nb-na)( 1 / R1 + 1 / R2)
Dividing both sides by na, We get
B1 / v + 1 / u = (nb/ na – 1)(1 / R1 + 1 / R2)
We know nb / na = nba called refractive index of lens with respect to
surrounding medium.
1 / v +1 / u = (nba– 1)(1 / R1 + 1 / R2)
This is derived for specific case for the convex lens so we need to
generalize this relation. For this we use sign convention. Applying sign
convention to this specific case we get,
1/v - 1/u = (nba– 1)(1/R1 - 1/R2)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 131We know that
1/v -1/u = 1/f
So, we get
1/f  = (nba– 1)(1/R1 - 1/R2)  ...................(3)
If the surrounding medium is air, then the relative refractive index
could be absolute refractive index of the lens.
1/f  = (n– 1)(1/R1 - 1/R2) ...................(4)
This can be used only when the lens is kept in air.
Where n is absolute refractive index and this equation is called lens
maker’s formula.
NOTE: Always use sign convention while using any formula derived
in this chapter and the above formula can be used for any thin lens.
The convex lens behaves as a converging lens, if it is kept in a medium
with refractive index less than the refractive index of the lens. It behaves
like a diverging lens when it is kept in a transparent medium with greater
refractive index than that of the lens.
For example an air bubble in water behaves like a diverging lens.
Let us see an example for lens maker formula.
Example 7
 What is the focal length of double concave lens kept in air with two
spherical surfaces of radii R1 = 30cm and R2 =60cm. Take refractive index
of lens as n = 1.5.
Solution:
From the figure E-7 using sign convention we get
R1 = -30cm, R2 = 60cm and also given that  n = 1.5
using 1/f = (n-1)(1/R1 – 1/R2)
   1/f = (1.5 - 1)[1/(-30)-1/60]
Solving this, we get
f = -120cm
Here minus indicates that the lens is
divergent.
C2
fig-E(7)C1 Light rays
Key words
Lens, Focal length, Focus, Optic centre, Principal axis,
Radius of curvature, Centre of curvature.
Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces 132 X ClassImprove your learning
•The formula used when a light ray enters  a medium with refractive index n2 from a medium with
refractive index n1 at curved interface with a radius of curvature R is
n2/v –n1/u = (n2- n1)/R
•A lens is formed when one medium is separated from another medium by two surfaces, one of
which is curved.
•Lens formula is 1/f =1/v – 1/u
 where f is the focal length of lens, u is the object distance and v is the image distance.
•Lens maker’s formula is
1/f = (n-1)(1/R1-1/R2)
where R1 and R2 are radii of curvature , n is the refractive index  and f is the focal length.
1. A man wants to get a picture of a zebra. He photographed a white donkey after fitting a glass,
with black stripes on to the lens of his camera. What photo will he get? Explain. (AS1)
2. Two converging lenses are to be placed in the path of parallel rays so that the rays remain
parallel after passing through both lenses. How should the lenses be arranged? Explain with a
neat ray diagram. (AS1)
3. The focal length of a converging lens is 20cm. An object is 60cm from the lens. Where will the
image be formed and what kind of image is it?  (AS1)
                       (Ans: A real, diminished, inverted image formed at 30cm from the lens)
4. A double convex lens has two surfaces of equal radii ‘R’ and refractive index n = 15. Find the
focal length ‘f’. (AS1)
5. Write the lens maker’s formula and explain the terms in it. (AS1)
6. How do you verify experimentally that the focal length of a convex lens is increased when it is
kept in water? (AS1)
7. How do you find the focal length of a lens experimentally? (AS1)
8. Harsha tells Siddhu that the double convex lens behaves like a convergent lens. But Siddhu
knows that Harsha’s assertion is wrong and corrected Harsha by asking some questions. What
are the questions asked by Siddhu? (AS2)
9.Assertion (A): A person standing on the land appears taller than his actual height to a fish
inside a pond. (AS2)
Reason (R): Light bends away from the normal as it enters air from water.
Which of the following is correct? Explain.
a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A.
b) Both A and R are true and R is not the correct explanation of A.c) A is true but R is false. d) Both A and R are false.
e) A is false but R is true.What we have learnt

Free distribution by A.P. Government 13310. A convex lens is made up of three different materials as shown in the figure
Q-10. How many of images does it form?   (AS2)
11. Can a virtual image be photographed by a camera?(AS2)
12. You have a lens. Suggest an experiment to find out the focal length of the lens.
(AS3)
13. Let us assume a system that consists of two lenses with focal length f1 and f2
respectively. How do you find the focal length of the system experimentally,  when
i) two lenses are touching each otherii) they are separated by a distance ‘d’ with common principal axis. (AS3)
14. Collect the information about the lenses available in an optical shop. Find out how the focal
length of a lens may be determined by the given ‘power’ of the lens. (AS4)
15. Collect the information about lenses used by Galileo in his telescope. (AS4)
16. Use the data obtained by activity-2 in table-1 of this lesson and draw the graphs of u vs v and
1/u vs 1/v. (AS5)
17. Figure Q-17 shows ray AB that has passed through a divergent lens. Construct the path of the
ray up to the lens if the position of its foci is known. (AS5)
18. Figure Q-18 shows a point light source and its image produced by a lens with an optical axis
N
1N2. Find the position of the lens and its foci using a ray diagram. (AS5)
19. Find the focus by drawing a ray diagram using the position of source S and the image S/ given
in the figure Q-19.   (AS5)
20. A parallel beam of rays is incident on a convergent lens with a focal length of 40cm. Where
should a divergent lens with a focal length of 15 cm be placed for the beam of rays to remain
parallel after passing through the two lenses? Draw a ray diagram. (AS5)
21. Draw ray diagrams for the following positions and explain the nature and position of image.
i. Object is placed at C2
ii. Object is placed between F2 and optic centre P. (AS5)
22. How do you appreciate the coincidence of the experimental facts with the results obtained by
a ray diagram in terms of behaviour of images formed by lenses? (AS6)
23. Find the refractive index of the glass which is a symmetrical convergent lens if its focal length is
equal to the radius of curvature of its surface. (AS7) (Ans :1.5)
24. Find the radii of curvature of a convexo –concave convergent lens made of glass with refractive
index n=1.5 having focal length of 24cm. One of the radii of curvature is double the other.
(Ans:R1=6cm,R2=12cm) (AS7)
fig-Q(19)N1N2
N1N2
fig- Q(18)
 fig-Q(17)FF/AB
S/S
fig-Q(10)
Refraction of Light at Curved Surfaces 134 X ClassFill in the blanks25.  The distance between two point sources of light is 24cm .Where should a convergent lens with
a focal length of f=9cm be placed between them to obtain the images of both sources at the
same point?     (AS7)
26. Suppose you are inside the water in a swimming pool near an edge. A friend is standing on the
edge. Do you find your friend taller or shorter than his usual height? Why?(AS7)
1. The rays from the distant object, falling on the convex lens pass through ......................
2. The ray passing through the ........................... of the lens is not deviated.3. Lens formula is given by ..........................4. The focal length of the plano convex lens is 2R where R is the radius of curvature of the surface.
Then the refractive index of the material of the lens is.....................
5. The lens which can form real and virtual images is .........................
1. Which one of the following materials cannot be used to make a lens? [ ]
a) water b) glass
c) plastic d) clay
2. Which of the following is true? [ ]
a) the distance of virtual image is always greater than the object distance for convex lens
b) the distance of virtual image is not greater than the object distance for convex lens
c) convex lens always forms a real image
d) convex lens always forms a virtual image
3. Focal length of the plano-convex lens is ............. when its radius of curvature of the surface is
R and n is the refractive index of the lens. [ ]a) f = R b) f = R/2
c) f = R/(n–1) d) f = (n–1)/R
4. The value of the focal length of the lens is equal to the value of the image distance when the rays
are [ ]
a) passing through the optic centre b) parallel to the principal axisc) passing throught he focus d) in all the cases
5. Which of the following is the lens maker’s formula [ ]
a) 1/f = (n-1)(1/R
1+1/R2) b) 1/f = (n+1)(1/R1-1/R2)
c) 1/f = (n-1)(1/R1-1/R2) d) 1/f = (n+1)(1/R1+1/R2)Multiple choice questions
Free distribution by A.P. Government 135You have studied refraction of light through lenses in the previous
chapter. You have learnt about nature, position and relative size of image
formed by lenses for various distances of objects. In class IX, chapter VIon sense organs in Biological science text book, explained the structure
of the human eye. The human eye functions on the principle of sensation
of vision. We see objects because the light scattered from them falls onthe eye. The eye has a lens in its structure.
In the previous chapter, you learned that the focal length of lens and
object distance determine the nature, position and size of image.
•What is the function of lens in human eye?
•How does it help to see objects at long distances and short distances?
•How is it possible to get the image at the same distance on the retina?
•Are we able to see all objects in front of our eye clearly?
•How do the lenses used in spectacles correct defects of vision?To answer these questions, you need to understand the structure and
functioning of the human eye.
Let us do the following activities to know about some interesting facts
about our vision.
Least distance of distinct vision
Activity 1
Take a text book and hold it with your hands in front of you at a
certain distance. Now try to read the contents on the page. Slowly move
the book towards your eye till it is very close to your eyes.
•What changes do you notice?Human Eye and
Colourful world7Chapter

Human  Eye and Colourful World 136 X Class
You may see that printed letters on the page of the text book appear
blurred or you feel strain in the eye.
Now slowly move the book backwards to a position where you can see
clear printed letters without straining your eye. Ask your friend to measure
the distance between your eye and text book at this position. Note downits value. Repeat the activity with other friends and note down the distances
for distinct vision in each case.
Find the average of all these distances of clear vision.
•What value do you get for average distance?
From this activity you will come to know that to see an object
comfortably and distinctly, you must hold it at a distance about 25 cm
from your eyes. This distance is called least distance of distinct vision.
This varies from person to person and with age. At a young age (say below
10 years) the muscles around the eye are strong and flexible and can bearmore strain. Therefore the least distance of distinct vision at this age is as
close as 7 to 8 cm. In old age the muscles cannot sustain more strain
hence the least distance of distinct vision shifts to a larger value, say, about1 to 2 m or even more.
•Are you able to see the top and bottom of an object placed at a distance
of about 25 cm from your eye irrespective of its shape?
Let us find out.
Activity  2
Collect a few wooden sticks used in cloth roller in
clothes store (or) collect waste PVC pipes that are used
for electric wiring. Prepare sticks or pipes of 20 cm, 30cm, 35 cm, 40 cm, 50 cm from them. Place a retort stand
on a table and stand near the table such that your head is
beside the vertical stand (see fig 1). Adjust the clamp on
the horizontal rod and fix it at a distance of 25 cm from
your eyes. Ask one of your friends to fix a wooden stick
of 30 cm height to the clamp in a vertical position as shownin fig1.
Now keeping your vision parallel to horizontal rod of
the stand, try to see the top and bottom of wooden stick kept in vertical
position.
•Are you able to see both ends of the stick simultaneously without any
movement (shaking) in your eyes?fig-1
Free distribution by A.P. Government 137In activity-1, you learned that least distance for distinct vision is about
25 cm. It varies from person to person. If you are not able to see both end
of the stick at this distance (25 cm), adjust the vertical stick on thehorizontal rod till you are able to see both ends of the stick at the smallest
possible distance from your eye. Fix the vertical stick at this position withthe help of the clamp.
Without changing the position of the clamp on the horizontal rod,
replace this stick of 30 cm length with other sticks of various lengths oneby one and try to see the top and bottom of the stick simultaneously without
any change in the position of eye either upwards downwards or side ways.
•Are you able to see both ends of the sticks in all these cases? If not
why?
Let us know.
Observe the following figure-2. You can see the whole object AB which
is at a distance of 25 cm (least distance of distinct vision) because the
rays coming from the ends A and B of the object AB will enter the eye.
Similarly you can also see whole object CD with eye as explained above.
Let us assume that AB moves closer to the eye to a position A
I BI  as shown
in figure2.
•Will you be able to see the whole object now?
From the figure 2, you notice that you will be able
to see only the part (EF) of the object AI    BI  because the
rays coming from E and F enter your eye. The rays
coming from AI  and BI   cannot enter your eye.
The rays coming from the extreme ends of an object
form an angle at the eye. If this angle is below 600, we
can see the whole object. If this angle is above 600, then
we can see only the part of the object.
This maximum angle, at which we are able to see the whole object is
called angle of vision. The angle of vision for a healthy human being is
about 600. It varies from person to person and with age.
You have learnt that the value of least distance of distinct vision is
about 25 cm and the value of angle of vision of human beings is about 600.
You also learnt that these values change from person to person and with
age of person.
•Why do the values of least distance of distinct vision and angle of
vision change with person and age?
To answer the above question, we need to understand the structure of
eye and its functioning.
A
BAI
BIE
FC
Dfig-2
Human  Eye and Colourful World 138 X Class
Structure of human eye
The human eye is one of the most important
sense organs. It enables us to see the object and
colours around us.
Figure 3 shows schematically the basic
components of human eye. The eye ball is nearly
spherical in shape. The front portion is more
sharply curved and is covered by a transparent
protective membrane called the ‘cornea’. It is this
portion which is visible from outside. Behind the cornea, there is placefilled with a liquid called aqueous humour and behind this a crystallinelens which  is responsible for the image formation. Between the aqueous
humour and the lens, we have a muscular diaphragm called ‘iris’ which has
a small hole in it called pupil. Iris is the coloured part that we see in aneye.
The pupil appears black because any light falling on it goes into the
eye and there is almost no chance of light coming back to the outside. Iris
helps in controlling the amount of light entering the eye through ‘pupil’.
In low light condition, the iris makes the pupil to expand so that more light
is allowed to go in  and in the case of bright (or) excess light condition, itmakes the pupil contract and there by prevent the excess light not to gointo eye. Thus ‘iris’ enables  pupil to act as a “variable aperture” for entryof light into the eye.
The lens is hard in the middle and gradually becomes soft towards the
outer edge. The light that enters the eye forms an image on the retina. (It
covers the rear part of eyeball). The distance between the lens and retina
is about 2.5 cm i.e.,  for any position of object in front of the eye the
image distance is fixed and about 2.5 cm.•How can we get this same image distance for various positions ofobjects?
•Can you answer this question using concepts of refraction through
lenses?
In the previous chapter, you have learnt that for different positions of
object, the image distance remains constant only when there is a change infocal length of lens. Further,  the focal length of a lens depends on thematerial by which it has been made and radii of curvature of lens. We needto change focal length of eye lens to get same image distance for various
positions of object in front of the eye. This is only possible when the
eyelens is able to change its shape.fig-3retina
lensiris
pupil
aqueous
humour
corneaciliary
muscles
optic nerve
Free distribution by A.P. Government 139•How does eye lens change its focal length?
•How does this change take place in the eye ball?
Let us know
The ciliary muscle to which eye lens is attached (see fig-3) helps the
eye lens to change its focal length by changing the radii of curvature of the
eye lens.
When the eye is focussed on a distant object, the ciliary muscles are
relaxed so that the focal length of eye lens has its maximum value which is
equal to its distance from the retina. The parallel rays coming into the eye
are then focussed on to the retina and we see the object clearly.
When the eye is focussed on a closer object, the ciliary muscles are
strained and focal length of eye-lens decreases. The ciliary muscles adjust
the focal length in such a way that the image is formed on retina and we
see the object clearly. This process of adjusting focal length is called“accommodation”. However these muscles cannot strain beyond a limit
and hence if the object is brought too close to eyes, the focal length cannot
be adjusted to form an image on the retina. Thus there is a minimum distancefor distinct vision of an object which is roughly equal to 25 cm as we have
learned in activity-1.
•Does eye lens form a real image or virtual image?
•How does the image formed on retina help us to perceive the object
without change in its shape, size and colour?
Let us knowThe eye-lens forms a real and inverted image of an object on the retina.
The retina is a delicate membrane, which contains about 125 million
receptors called ‘rods’ and ‘cones’ which receive the light signal (rods-
identify the colour: cones-identify the intensity of  light). These signalsare transmitted to the brain through about 1 million optic-nerve fibres.
The brain interprets these signals and finally processes the information so
that we perceive the object in terms of its shape, size and colour.
In our previous discussion, you have learnt that eye-lens itself changes
its focal length in accordance with distance of the object with the help of
ciliary muscles.
•Is there any limit to the change of focal length of the eye-lens?
•What are the maximum and minimum focal lengths of the eye lens?
How can we find them?
Let us find
Human  Eye and Colourful World 140 X ClassWhen the object is at infinity, the parallel rays from
the object falling on the eye lens are refracted  and
they form a point sized image on retina (see fig-4a).
In this situation, eye-lens has a maximum focal
length.
When the object is at infinity,
u= - ∞; v = 2.5 cm (image distance which is equal
to distance between eye-lens and retina)
using the formula 1/f = 1/v – 1/u
1/f max = 1/ 2.5  + 1/ ∞
1/f max=1/2.5+0
fmax = 2.5 cm
we get, fmax = 2.5 cm
consider that an object is placed at distance of 25 cm from our eye. In
this situation eye has minimum focal length.
Here u = - 25 cm; v = 2.5 cmUsing the formula 1/f = 1/v – 1/u
1/f
min  = 1/ 2.5  + 1/ 25
1/fmin=11/ 25
fmin = 25 /11 = 2.27 cm
If the position   of an object is between infinity and the point of least
distance of distinct vision, then the eye lens adjusts it’s focal length in
between 2.5 cm to 2.27 cm to form a clear image on the retina.
The ability of eye-lens to change its focal length is called
“accommodation of lens”.
•What happens if the eye lens is not able to adjust its focal length?
•What happens if the focal length of eye lens is beyond the range of 2.5
cm to 2.27 cm?
Let us find out.Sometimes the eye may gradually lose its ability for accommodation.
In such conditions the person cannot see an object clearly and comfortably.
The vision becomes blurred due to defects of the eye lens. There are mainly
three common defects of vision.
They are:
i. Myopiaii. Hypermetropia
iii.Presbyopia.fig-4(a)
fig-4(b)L
Free distribution by A.P. Government 141Myopia
Some people cannot see objects at long distances but can see nearby
objects clearly. This type of defect in vision is called ‘Myopia’. It is also
called ‘near sightedness’. For these people the maximum focal length isless than 2.5 cm. In such cases the rays coming from distant objects, after
refraction through the eye
lens, form an image before the
retina as shown in figures 5(a)
and (b).
A healthy person can see
objects at all distances more
than 25 cm clearly but aperson with myopia can see
objects clearly up to a certain
distance. Let the extremepoint from where an object
appears clearly to a person
with myopia be ‘M’ (shown infigure 5(c)).
If the object is at M or in
between M and point of leastdistance of distinct vision(L),the eye lens can form an
image on the retina (see
figure 5(c) and 5(d)). This point M is called ‘far point’.
The point of maximum distance at which the eye lens can form an
image on the retina is called ‘far point’.
The defect, in which people cannot see objects beyond far point is
called ‘Myopia’.
•What can we do to correct myopia?
The eye lens can form clear image on the retina, when an object is
placed between far point and point of least distance of distinct vision. If
we are able to bring the image of the object kept beyond far point , betweenthe far point and the point
of least distance of distinct
vision using a lens, thisimage acts as an object for
the eye lens.
fig-5(a)
fig-5(b)
fig-5(c)
fig-5(d)M
M
M
ML
L
L
L O
fig-5(e)ML
Human  Eye and Colourful World 142 X ClassThis can be made possible only when a concave lens is used (recollect
image formation by refraction through a concave lens).
•How can you decide the focal length of the lens to be used to correct
myopia?
To correct one’s Myopia, we need to select a lens which forms an
image at the far point for an object at infinity. We need to select bi-concave
lens to achieve this.
This image acts like an object for the eye lens. Hence the final image
is formed on the retina.
Let us find the focal length of this bi-concave lens.
Here object distance (u) is infinity and image distance (v) is equal to
distance of far point.
u = - ∞  ; v = distance of far point = -D
let ‘f’ be the focal length of bi-concave lens.
Using lens formula, 1/f = 1/v – 1/u
1/f  = 1/ -D B f = -D
Here ‘f’ is negative showing that it is a concave lens.
•What happens when the eye has a minimum focal length greater than
2.27 cm?
Let us find out.
Hypermetropia
Hypermetropia is also
known as “far sightedness”. A
person with hypermetropiacan see distant objects clearly
but cannot see objects at near
distances, because the
minimum focal length of eye
lens for the person of
hypermetropia is greater than2.27 cm. In such cases, the
rays coming from a nearby
object, after refraction at eyelens, forms an image beyond
the retina as shown in figure
6 (a).
fig-6(a)
fig-6(b)
fig-6(c)H
H
HL
L
L
Free distribution by A.P. Government 143
Let the point of least distance at which the eye lens forms a clear
image on the retina for a person with hypermetropia be ‘H’. See figure
6(b).
If an object is at H or beyond H, the eye can form its image on retina
(see figures 6(b) and 6(c)). If the object is between H and point of least
distance of distinct vision (L) then it cannot form an image. See figure6(a).
The point of minimum distance at which the eye lens can form an image
on the retina is called near point (d). The people with defect ofhypermetropia cannot see objects placed between near point (H) and pointof least distance of distinct vision (L).
•How can you correct this defect?
Eye lens can form a clear image on the retina when any object is placed
beyond near point. To correct the defect of hypermetropia, we need to use
a lens which forms an image of an object beyond near point, when the
object is between near point (H) and least distance of distinct vision (L).
This is possible only when a double convex lens is used.
•How can you decide the focal length of the convex lens to be used?
To find the focal length of
lens, let us consider that the
object is at point of least
distance of distinct vision (L).Then the defect of vision,hypermetropia, is corrected when the image of the object at L is formed atthe near point (H) by using a bi-convex lens as shown in figure 6(d).
This image acts like an object for the eye lens. Hence final image due
to eye is formed at retina (see figure 6(d))
Here object distance (u) = -25 cm
Image distance (v) = distance of near point = -d
Let ‘f’ be the focal length of bi-convex lens.
Using lens formula, 1/f = 1/v – 1/u
1/f  = 1/ -d – 1/(-25)
1/ f = -1/d +1/25
1/ f = (d – 25)/25d
f= 25d / (d – 25) (f is measured in centimeters)
we know that if d > 25cm, then ‘f’ becomes +ve i.e., we need to use
biconvex lens to correct defect of hypermetropia.fig-6(d)HL
Human  Eye and Colourful World 144 X ClassPresbyopia
Presbyopia is vision defect when the ability of accommodation of the
eye usually decreases with ageing. For most people the near point gradually
recedes away. They find it difficult to see nearby objects clearly anddistinctly.
This happens due to gradual weakening of ciliary muscles and
diminishing flexibility of the eye lens. This effect can be seen in aged
people. Sometimes a person may suffer from both myopia and
hypermetropia with ageing .
To correct this type of defect of vision we need bi-focal lenses which
are formed using both concave and convex lenses. Its upper portion consists
of the concave lens and lower portion consists of the convex lens.
If you go to an eye hospital to get tested for vision defects, the doctor
gives you a prescription that contains some information regarding type of
lens to be used to correct vision.
•Have you ever observed details in the prescription?
You might have heard people saying “my sight is increased or
decreased”.•What does it mean?Usually doctors, after testing for defects of vision, prescribe corrective
lenses indicating their power which determines the type of lens to be used
and its focal length.
•What do you mean by power of lens?
Power of lens:The degree of convergence or divergence of light rays that can be
achieved by a lens is expressed in terms of its power.
The reciprocal of focal length is called power of lens.
Let ‘f’ be the focal length of lens.
Power of lens P = 1 / f(in m); P = 100 / f (in cm)The unit of power is dioptre.
It is denoted by the letter ‘D’.
Example1
Doctor advised to use 2D lens. What is its focal length?
Solution: Given that power of lens P = 2D
Using, P = 100 / f (in cm);   2 = 100 / f
Therefore, f  =  100/2  = 50 cm.
The lens has focal length, f = 50 cm.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 145Dispersion and Scattering of Light
You might have seen a rainbow form in the sky just after a rain shower.
It must have fascinated you with spectacular colours appearing as a semi-
circular band of colours.
•How could the white light of the sun give us various colours of the
rainbow?
In previous chapters, you have studied the behaviour of light when it
refracts through plane surface and curved surfaces, such as a lens. You
also studied the nature, position and relative size of image formed by lenses.
•What happens to a light ray when it passes through a transparent
medium bounded by plane surfaces which are inclined to each other?
•What is a prism?
Prism
A prism is a transparent medium separated
from the surrounding medium by at least two plane
surfaces which are inclined at a certain angle in
such a way that, light incident on one of the plane
surfaces emerges from the other plane surface.
To understand the behaviour of light when it is
incident on the plane of a prism and passes into
the prism, we need to define certain terms
associated with prisms.
Consider a triangular glass prism. It contains
two triangular bases and three rectangular plane
lateral surfaces. These lateral surfaces are inclined to each other.
Let us consider that triangle PQR represents outline of the prism where
it rests on its triangular base. Let us assume that a light ray is incident onthe plane surface PQ of a prism at M as shown in figure 7. Draw a
perpendicular to the surface at M. It becomes a normal to that surface. The
angle between the incident ray  and normal is called angle of incidence
(i
1).  The ray is refracted at M. It moves through prism and meets the other
plane surface at N and finally comes out of the prism. The ray which comes
out of the surface PR at N is called emergent ray . Draw a perpendicular to
PR at point N. The angle between the emergent ray and normal is called
angle of emergence (i2 ).The angle between the plane surfaces PQ and PR
is called the angle of the prism or refracting angle  of prism A and the
angle between the incident ray and emergent ray is called angle of
deviation(d).fig-7
P
QRNormal
Normal
i1i2 MN
Incident rayEmergent ray
Human  Eye and Colourful World 146 X Class
Let us now take up an activity to study the refraction of light through a
triangular prism.
Aim: Finding the refractive index of a prism.
Material required: Prism, piece of white chart of size 20x20 cm,
pencil, pins, scale and protractor.
Procedure: Take a prism and place it on the white chart in such a way
that the triangular base of the prism is on the chart. Draw a line around the
prism (boundry) using a pencil. Remove the prism.
•What is the shape of the outline drawn?
It is a triangle. Name its vertices as P,Q, and R.[for many prisms the
triangle formed is equilateral]. The refracting surfaces could be rectangular
in shape. Find the angle between PQ and PR . This is the angle of the prism(A).
Mark M on the side of triangle PQ and also draw a perpendicular to
PQ at M. Place the centre of the protractor at M and along the normal.
Mark an angle of  30
0 and then draw a line up to M. This line denotes the
incident ray.  This angle is called angle of incidence. Note it in a table (1).
Draw a small arrow on it as shown in figure 8.
Place the prism in its position
(triangle) again. Now fix two pins
vertically on the line at points A and
B as shown in figure 8. Look for
the images of pins through the
prism from the other side (PR) and
fix another two pins at points C andD in such a way that all the four pins
appear to lie along the same straight line. Doit carefully. Now remove the prism and takeout pins. Draw a line joining the two pin-holes
formed by the pins to meet surface ‘PR’, this
is the emergent ray which ‘emerges from’ thesurface PR at a point ‘N’. The angle between
the normal at N and the emergent ray is the
angle of emergence. Measure this angle andnote its value in the table (1).Lab Activity
fig-8Angle of
incidence (i1)Angle of
emergence (i2)Angle of
deviation (d)Table 1
P
Q RNormal
Normal
i1i2 MN
ABC
DA
PindA
O
Free distribution by A.P. Government 147Now join the points M and N by a straight line. The line passing through
the points A,B, M,N,C and D represents the path of light when it suffers
refraction through the prism.
•How do you find the angle of deviation?
Extend both incident and emergent rays till they meet at a point ‘O’.
Measure the angle between these two rays. This is the angle of deviation.
It is denoted by a letter ‘d’. Note it in table (1). Repeat this procedure for
various angles of incidence such as 400,500 etc. Find the corresponding
angles of deviation and angles of emergence and note them in table (1).
•What do you notice from the angles of deviation?
You will notice that the angle of deviation decreases first and then
increases with increase in the angle of incidence.•Can you draw a graph between angle of incidence and angle of
deviation?
Take angle of incidence along X- axis and the angle of deviation along
Y- axis. Using a suitable scale, mark points on a graph paper for every pair
of angles. Finally join the points to obtain a graph (smooth curve). Check
your graph with graph shown in figure 9.
• From the graph, can you find the minimum of the
angles of deviation?
Yes we can. Draw a tangent line to the curve,
parallel to X- axis, at the lowest point of the graph.
The point where this line cuts the Y- axis gives the
angle of minimum deviation. It is denoted by D.
Draw a parallel line to y-axis through the point
where the tangent touches the graph. This line meets
x-axis at a point showing the angle of incidence
corresponding to the minimum deviation. If you do the experiment with
this angle of incidence you will get an angle of emergence equal to the
angle of incidence. Look at your table (1).
•Is there any relation between the angle of incidence and angle of
emergence and angle of deviation?
•Can you find refractive index of a prism? If yes, how?
Let us find out.
Derivation of formula for refractive index of a prism
Observe the ray diagram in the figure 10(a).
From triangle OMN, we getd = i
1- r1 + i2 – r2fig-9
i1=i2D
Angle of incidence i1Angle of deviation dY
X
Human  Eye and Colourful World 148 X Class
d = (i1+i2) – (r1+r2) ––—— (1)
From triangle PMN, we have
 A + (900-r1) + (900-r2) = 1800
By simplification, we get r
1 + r2 = A ———(2)
From (1) and (2), we have
d = (i1+i2) – A
A+d = i1+i2––——(3)
This is the relation between angle of
incidence, angle of emergence, angle of deviation and angle of prism.
From Snell’s law, we know that n1 sin i = n2 sin r
Let n be the refractive index of the prism.
Using  Snell’s law at M, with  refractive index of air
n1 =1;  i = i1 ;  n2 = n ;   r = r1 , gives
sin i1 = n sin r1———(4)
similarly, at N with  n1 = n ;  i = r2 ;  n2 = 1 ;   r = i2 , gives
n Sin r2 = Sin i2———(5)
We know that at the angle of minimum deviation (D), the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of emergence i.e., i1 = i2. Observe figure
10(b). You will note that MN is parallel to the side QR, actually ray MN is
parallel to the base of the prism. (See figure 10(b)).
When i1 = i2, angle of deviation (d) becomes angle of minimum
deviation (D).
Then equation (3) becomes
  A+D  = 2i1
or   i1 = (A+D)/2
When i1 = i2 then, it is clear that r1 = r2
So from equation (2) we get,
2r1 = A
or  r1 = A/2
Substituting i1 and r1 in (4) we get
  Sin{(A+D)/2)} = n. Sin(A/2)
Therefore,  n = Sin(A+D/2)/Sin(A/2) —(6)
This is the formula for the refractive index of the prism.
Now use the results of lab activity (1) and find refractive index of the
prism using equation (6)fig-10(a)
fig-10(b)
RP
i1
i2 MNdO
Qr1 r2A
RP
i1 i1MNDO
Qr1r1A
Free distribution by A.P. Government 149Let us see an example.
Example  2
A prism with an angle A = 600 produces an angle of minimum deviation
of 300. Find the refractive index of material of the prism.
Solution:  Given that A = 600 and D = 300.
Using n = Sin[(A+D)/2]/Sin(A/2) = Sin(900/2)/Sin(300)
        = Sin 450/ Sin300 = (1/ √2)/(1/2) = √2
B n = √2
thus, the refractive index of the given prism = √2
––––––––––––
Let us take up a simple activity with prism.
Activity  3
Do this experiment in the dark room. Take a prism and place it on the
table near a vertical white wall. Take a thin wooden plank. Make a small
hole in it and fix it vertically on the table. Place the prism between the
wooden plank and wall.  Place a white light source behind the hole of the
wooden plank. Switch on the light. The rays coming out of the hole of
plank become a narrow beam of light. Adjust the height of the prism such
that the light falls on one of the lateral surfaces. Observe the changes in
emerged rays of the prism. Adjust the prism by slightly rotating it till you
get an image on the wall.
•What do you observe on the wall?
•Could you get a coloured image on the wall?
•Why does white light split into colours?
•What colours do you see?
•Can you notice any change in the angle of deviation of each colour?
•Which colour has the minimum deviation?
Let us do another experiment.
Activity  4
Take a metal tray and fill it with water. Place a
mirror in the water such that it makes an angle to the
water surface. Now focus white light on the mirror
through the water as shown in figure 11. Try to obtain
colour on a white card board sheet kept above the water
surface. Note the names of the colours you could see
in your book.fig-11
Metal
trayWaterWhite
light
MirrorDispersed light
Human  Eye and Colourful World 150 X ClassIn activity (3) and (4), we observe that white light is splitting into
certain different colours.
•Is this splitting of white light into colours explained by using ray
theory?
It is not possible to explain the splitting of white light into different
colours using ray theory.• Why is this so?
Let us see
Dispersion of Light
In activity 3, we observe that the angle of deviation is minimum for
red as compared to the angles of deviation of other colours and maximum
for violet.
The splitting of white light into different colours (VIBGYOR) is called
dispersion .
In our previous discussion, we learnt that for a particular refractive
index of prism there must be only one angle of minimum deviation and
according to Fermat’s principle, light ray always chooses the path of leasttime. But in activity-3,we noticed that light has chosen different paths.
•Does this mean that the refractive index of the prism varies from colour
to colour?
•Is the speed of light of each colour different?
The situation we witnessed in activities (3) and (4) rule out ray theory
of light. We can consider that white light is a collection of waves with
different wavelengths. Violet colour is known to have the shortestwavelength while red is of the longest wavelength.
According to wave theory, light can be thought of a wave propagating
in all directions. Light is an electromagnetic wave. Here no particlephysically oscillates back and forth. Instead, the magnitude of electric and
magnetic fields, associated with the electromagnetic wave, vary
periodically at every point. These oscillating electric and magnetic fieldspropagate in all directions with the speed of light.
•Can you guess now, why light splits into different colours when it
passes through a prism?
Free distribution by A.P. Government 151The reason lies in the fact that, while the speed of light is constant in
vacuum for all colours, it depends on the wavelength of light when it passes
through a medium. We know that refractive index is the ratio of speeds in
vacuum and in the medium. Consequently, the refractive index of a medium
depends on wavelength of light. When white light passes through a medium,
each colour selects its least time path and we have refraction of different
colours to different extents. This results in separation of colours, producing
a spectrum on the wall and in the mirror as we saw in activities (3) and (4).It has been experimentally found that refractive index decreases with an
increase in wavelength. If we compare the wave lengths of seven colours
in VIBGYOR, red colour has longest wavelength and violet colour hasshortest wavelength. The refractive index of red is low hence it suffers
low deviation.
We noticed that when white light passes through a prism, it splits into
seven colours. Let us assume that you have sent a single colour ray through
the prism.
•Does it split into more colours? Why?
We know that the frequency of light is the property of the source and
it is equal to number of waves leaving the source per second. This cannot
be changed by any medium. Hence frequency doesn’t change due torefraction. Thus coloured light passing through any transparent medium
retains its colour.
While refraction occurs at the interface, the number of waves that are
incident on the interface in a second must be equal to the number of waves
passing through any point taken in another medium. This means that the
frequency of the light wave remains unaltered while its wavelength changes
depending on the medium through which it passes. We know that the relation
between the speed of wave (v), wavelength ( λ) and frequency (f) is.
  v = f λ (frequency (f) may be denoted by υ)
For refraction at any interface, v is proportional to λ. Speed of the
wave increases with increase in wavelength of light and vice versa.
•Can you give an example in nature, where you observe colours as seen
in activity 3?
Your answer certainly is a rainbow. That is a good example of dispersion
of light.•When do you see a rainbow in the sky?
•Can we create a rainbow artificially?
Let us see how.
Human  Eye and Colourful World 152 X ClassActivity 5
Select a white coloured wall on which the sun rays fall. Stand in front
of a wall in such a way that the sun rays fall on your back. Hold a tube
through which water is flowing. Place your finger in the tube to obstructthe flow of water. Water comes out through the small gaps between the
tube and your finger like a fountain.  Observe the changes on the wall
while the water shower is maintained; you can see colours on the wall.
•How is that you are able to see colours on
the wall?
•Are the sun rays coming back to your eyes
from the wall or from water drops?
Let us find out.
The beautiful colours of the rainbow are due
to dispersion of the sunlight by millions of tiny
water droplets. Let us consider the case of anindividual water drop.
Observe figure 12. The rays of sunlight enter
the drop near its top surface. At this first refraction,
the white light is dispersed into its spectrum of colours, violet beingdeviated the most and red the least. Reaching the opposite side of thedrop, each colour is reflected back into the drop because of total internal
reflection. Arriving at the surface of the drop, each colour is again refracted
into air. At the second refraction the angle between red and violet raysfurther increases when compared to the angle between those at first
refraction.
The angle between the incoming and outgoing rays can be anything
between 0
0 and about 420. We observe bright rainbow when the angle
between incoming and outgoing rays is near the maximum angle of 420.
Diagrammatically it is shown in figure 12.Although each drop disperses a
full spectrum of colours, an observer is in a position to see only a single
colour from any one drop depending upon its position.
If violet light from a single drop reaches the eye of an observer, red
light from the same drop can’t reach his eye. It goes elsewhere possibly
downwards of the eye of the observer (see in figure 13). To see red light,
one must look at the drop higher in the sky. The colour red will be seen
when the angle between a beam of sunlight and light sent back by a drop is42
0. The colour violet is seen when the angle between a sunbeam and light
sent back by a drop is 400. If you look at an angle between 400 and 420, you
fig-12Sun light
Water drop
RedViolet42o40o
Free distribution by A.P. Government 153
will observe the remaining
colours of VIBGYOR
• Why does the light dispersed
by the raindrops appear as a
bow?
To find answer this
question, we need a little
geometric reasoning. First ofall, a rainbow is not the flat twodimensional arc as it appears tous. The rainbow you see is actually a three dimensional cone with the tip atyour eye as shown in figure 14. All the drops that disperse the light towards
you lie in the shape of the cone– a cone of different layers. Thedrops that disperse red colourto your eye are on the outermost layer of the cone, similarlythe drops that disperse orangecolour to your eye are on thelayer of the cone beneath the redcolour cone. In this way the cone responsible for yellow lies beneath orangeand so on it till the violet colour cone becomes the innermost cone.(seein figure 14).
It is our common experience that the sky appears blue in colour on a
bright dry day.
•Why is the sky blue?To answer this question, you need to understand another phenomenon
of light called scattering.
•What is scattering?
Let us seefig-13Sun light
Water
drops
RedViolet42o40o
RedViolet
fig-14Sun light
Sun
42o40o
Think and discuss
•Can you imagine the shape of rainbow when observed during travel in an airplane?
Discuss with your friends and collect information.
Human  Eye and Colourful World 154 X Class
Scattering of Light
Scattering of light is a complex phenomenon. Let us try to understand
the idea of scattering.
•Do you know what happens to the free atom or molecule when it is
exposed to certain frequency of light?
Atoms or molecules which are exposed to light absorb light energy
and emit some part of the light energy in different directions. This is the
basic process happens in scattering of light.
The effect of light on a molecule or an atom depends on the size of
atom or molecule. If the size of the particle (atom or molecule) is small,
it will be affected by higher frequency (lower wave length) light and vice
versa.
Let us consider that a certain frequency of light
is incident on an atom. Then the atom comes into
vibration due to this light. This in turn releases or re-
emits light in all directions with different intensity.
The intensity of light is the energy of light passing
through unit area of plane, taken normal to thedirection of propagation of light, in one second.
Let us consider that the free atom or free
molecule is somewhere in space as shown in figure
15.
Light of certain frequency falls on that atom or molecule. This atom
or molecule responds to the light whenever the size of the atom or moleculeis comparable to the wave length of light. If this condition is satisfied, the
atom absorbs light and vibrates. Due to these vibrations, the atom re-emits
a certain fraction of absorbed energy in all directions with different
intensities. The re-emitted light is called scattered light and the process
of re-emission of light in all directions with different intensity is called
scattering of light. The atoms or molecules are called scattering centre.
Let us take the angle ‘ θ’ between the incident light and a direction in which
the intensity of scattered light is observed, we call this angle as angle ofscattering. It is experimentally observed that the intensity of scattered
light varies with angle of scattering. The intensity is maximum at 90
0 angle
of scattering.
This is the reason for the appearance of clear blue colour when look at
the sky in a direction perpendicular to the direction of the sun rays. If our
angle of view is changed, the intensity of blue colour also changes.fig-15Sun lightScattered light
Atom
Free distribution by A.P. Government 155Now you might have got a doubt why scattering of light gives blue
colour only. Why can’t it give other colours?
Let us find out whether the scattering centres are responsible for the
blue of the sky?
We know that our atmosphere contains different types of molecules
and atoms. The reason for blue sky is due to the molecules N2 and O2. The
sizes of these molecules are comparable to the wavelength of blue light.
These molecules act as scattering centres for scattering of blue light.
•Why is that the sky appears white sometimes when you view it in certain
direction on hot days?
Our atmosphere contains atoms and molecules of different sizes.
According to their sizes, they are able to scatter different wavelengths of
light. For example, the size of the water molecule is greater than the size
of the N2 or O2. It acts as a scattering centre for other frequencies which
are lower than the frequency of blue light.
On a hot day, due to rise in the temperature water vapour enters into
atmosphere which leads to abundant presence of water molecules in the
atmosphere. These water molecules scatter the colours of other frequencies(other than blue). All such colours of other frequencies reach your eyeand the sky appears white.
•Can we demonstrate scattering of light by an experiment?
Let us try
Activity 6
Take a solution of sodium-thio-sulphate (hypo) and sulphuric acid in a
glass beaker. Place the beaker in an open place where abundant sun light is
available. Watch the formation of grains of sulphur and observe changes inthe beaker.
You will notice that sulphur precipitates as the reaction is in progress.
At the beginning, the grains of sulphur are smaller in size and as the reactionprogresses, their size increases due to precipitation.
Sulphur grains appear blue in colour at the beginning and slowly their
colour becomes white as their size increases. The reason for this is
scattering of light. At the beginning, the size of grains is small and almostcomparable to the wave length of blue light. Hence they appear blue in thebeginning. As the size of grains increases, their size becomes comparableto wave lengths of other colours. As a result of this, they act as scattering
centres for other colours. The combination of all these colours appears as
white.
Human  Eye and Colourful World 156 X Class
Do you know?
Key words
Least distance of distinct vision, Angle of vision, Accommodation of eye lens,
Myopia, Hypermetropia, Presbyopia, Power of lens, Prism, Angle of prism or
refracting angle of prism, Angle of minimum deviation, Dispersion, Scattering.
Sir CV Raman•Do you know the reasons for appearance the red colour of sun duringsunrise and at sunset?
The atmosphere contains free molecules and atoms with different sizes.
These molecules and atoms scatter light of different wavelengths which
are comparable to their size. Molecules having a size that is comparableto the wavelength of red light are less in the atmosphere. Hence scattering
of red light is less when compared to the other colours of light. The light
from the sun needs to travel more distance in atmosphere during sunrise
and sunset to reach your eye. In morning and evening times, during sunrise
and sunset, except red light all colours scatter more and vanish before
they reach you. Since scattering of redlight is very small, it reaches you.As a result sun appears red in colour during sunrise and sunset.
•Can you guess the reason why sun doesnot appear red during noon
hours?
During noon hours, the distance to be travelled by the sun rays in the
atmosphere is less than that compared to morning and evening hours.
Therefore all colours reach your eye without much scattering. Hence the
sun appears white during noon hours.
So far, we have learned some ideas of the light such as refraction,
dispersion and scattering. These are wonderful phenomena occuring inour surroundings. When you observe any phenomena, try to resolve the
problem and appreciate the wonderful world based on the behaviour of
light.Our beloved scientist and Noble prize winner, Sir C.V .
Raman explained the phenomenon of light scattering in gasesand liquids. He found experimentally that the frequency of
scattered light by the liquids is greater than the frequency of
incident light. This is called Raman Effect. By using this effect
scientists determine the shapes of the molecules.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 157•The least distance of distinct vision is about 25cm and the angle of vision is about 600.
•The ability of eye lens to change its focal length is called accommodation of lens.
•The defect in which people cannot see objects beyond far point is called Myopia.
•The defect in which people cannot see objects situated before near point is called
Hypermetropia.
•Presbyopia is a vision defect indicating that the power of accommodation of the eye usually
decreases with ageing.
•The reciprocal of focal length is called power of the lens.
•The refractive index of prism is given by
n = Sin[(A+D)/2]/Sin(A/2)
where A is angle of prism and D is angle of minimum deviation.
•The splitting of white light into colours (VIBGYOR) is called dispersion.
•The process of re-emission of absorbed light in all directions with different intensities by atoms
or molecules,  is called scattering of light.
1. How do you correct the eye defect Myopia? (AS1)
2. Explain the correction of the eye defect Hypermetropia. (AS1)
3. How do you find experimentally the refractive index of material of a prism. (AS1)
4. Explain the formation of rainbow. (AS1)
5. Explain briefly the reason for the blue of the sky. (AS1)
6. Explain two activities for the formation of artificial rainbow. (AS1)7. Derive an expression for the refractive index of the material of a prism. (AS1)
8. Light of wavelength 
λ1 enters a medium with refractive index n2 from a medium with refractive
index n1. What is the wavelength of light in second medium?
(Ans: λ2 = n1λ1/n2)      (AS1)
NOTE: For questions 9 and 10 the following options are given. Choose the correct option by
making hypothesis based on given assertion and reason. Give an explanation.
a. Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A.b. Both A and R are true and R is not the correct explanation of A.
c. A is true but R is false.
d. Both A and R are false.
e.  A is false but R is true.Improve your learning
What we have learnt

Human  Eye and Colourful World 158 X Class9.Assertion (A): The refractive index of a prism depends only on the kind of glass of which it is
made of and the colour of light. (AS 2)
Reason (R): The refractive index of a prism depends on the refracting angle of the prism and
the angle of minimum deviation.
10.Assertion (A): Blue colour of sky appears due to scattering of light.
Reason (R): Blue colour has shortest wavelength among all colours
of white light. (AS 2)
11. Suggest an experiment to produce a rainbow in your classroom
and explain the procedure. (AS 3)
12. Prisms are used in binoculars. Collect information why prisms are
used in binoculars. (AS 4)
13. Incident ray on one of the face (AB) of a prism and emergent ray
from the face AC are given in figure Q-13. Complete the ray diagram.
(AS 5)
14. How do you appreciate the role of molecules in the atmosphere for the blue colour of the sky?
(AS 6)
15. Eye is the only organ to visualise the colourful world around us. This is possible due to
accommodation of eye lens. Prepare a six line stanza expressing your wonderful feelings.
(AS 6)
16. How do you appreciate the working of Ciliary muscles in the eye?  (AS 6)
17. Why does the sky sometimes appear white? (AS 7)18. Glass is known to be a transparent material. But ground glass is opaque and white in colour.
Why? (AS 7)
19. If a white sheet of paper is stained with oil, the paper turns transparent. Why? (AS 7)
20. A light ray falls on one of the faces of a prism at an angle 40
o so that it suffers angle of minimum
deviation of 30o. Find the angle of prism and angle of refraction at the given surface.
(Ans:50o, 25o) (AS 7)
21. The focal length of a lens suggested to a person with Hypermetropia is 100cm. Find the distance
of near point and power of the lens. (Ans: 33.33cm, 1D ) (AS 7)
22. A person is viewing an extended object. If a converging lens is placed in front of his eye, will he
feel that the size of object has increased? Why? (AS7)
1. The value of least distance of distinct vision is about .....................
2. The distance between the eye lens and retina is about ........................
3. The maximum focal length of the eye lens is about ............................4. The eye lens can change its focal length due to working of .................... muscles.fig-Q-13
AB
C
Mirror
Fill in the blanks
Free distribution by A.P. Government 159Multiple choice questions5. The power of lens is 1D then focal length is ...................
6. Myopia can be corrected by using ............................... lens.7. Hypermetropia can be corrected by using ............................... lens.
8. In minimum deviation position of prism, the angle of incidence is equal to angle of ..............
9. The splitting of white light into different colours (VIBGYOR) is called .....................10. During refraction of light, the character of light which does not change is ........................
1. The size of an object as perceived by an eye depends primarily on [ ]
a)  actual size of the object b)  distance of the object from the eye
c)  aperture of  the pupil d)  size if the image formed on the retina
2. When objects at different distances are seen by the eye which of the following remain constant?
a)  focal length of eye-lens b) object distance from eye-lens [ ]c)  the radii of curvature of eye-lens d)  image distance from eye-lens
3. During refraction, ________ will not change. [ ]
a)  wavelength b) frequencyc)  speed of light d) all the above
4. A ray of light falls on one of the lateral surface of an equilateral glass prism placed on the
horizontal surface of a table as shown in fig. MCQ-4. For minimum deviation of ray, which of
the following is true? [ ]
a)  PQ is horizontal
b)  QR is horizontal
c)  RS is horizontal
d) either PQ or RS is horizontal
5. Far point of a person is 5m. In order that he has normal vision what kind of spectcles should he
use [ ]
a) concave lense with focal length 5m b) concave lense with focal length 10m
c) convex lense with focal length 5m d) convex lense with focal length 2.5m
6. The process of re-emission of absorbed light in all directions with different intensities by the
atom or molecule is called ............... [ ]a) scattering of light b) dispersion of light
c) reflection of light d) refraction of light
PQR
S
fig-MCQ-4
Structure of Atom 160 X ClassYou have studied in the previous class about sub-atomic particles like
negatively charged electrons, positively charged protons and electrically
neutral neutrons.
•How do these sub-atomic particles coexist in an electrically neutral
atom?
You have acquired some fundamental ideas about atomic models
suggested by J J Thomson, Ernest Rutherford and Niels Bohr which have
been presented in Class 9.
Activity 1
On the basis of your previous knowledge can you prepare a model of
an atom?
•Can you arrange the sub-atomic particles in any other way in an atom?
 (Take the help of your friends, your teacher and the Internet). Observe
your atomic model and the models of your friends carefully and try to
answer the questions.
•Do all atoms have the same sub-atomic particles?
•Why is an atom of one element different from the atoms of other
elements?
•How are the electrons distributed in the space of an atom?
To answer the above questions, we need to understand the nature of
light, coloured flames and their characteristics.Structure of Atom8Chapter

Free distribution by A.P. Government 161Spectrum
You must have observed the formation of a rainbow.
•How many colours are there in a rainbow?
There are seven colours namely violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow,
orange and red (VIBGYOR) in a rainbow.
You can find the colours spreading continuously and the intensity of
each colour varies from one point to the other.
Wave nature of light
•When you throw a stone into a still pond, you observe ripples, which
are transmitting the disturbance in the form of waves on the surface of
water.
•You know that sound waves are produced when something vibrates;like a drum.
•In the same way electromagnetic waves are produced when an electric
charge vibrates (moves back and forth).
•How do the vibrating electric and magnetic fields around the chargebecome a wave that travel through space?
A vibrating electric charge creates a change in the electric field. The
changing electric field creates a changing magnetic field.
This process continues, with both the created fields being perpendicular
to each other and at right angles to the direction of propagation of the
wave.
Visible light is an electromagnetic wave and the speed of light ( c) is
3 × 10
8 m s–1.
•What are the characteristics of electromagnetic waves?
Electromagnetic energy travelling through a vacuum behaves in
some way like ocean waves travelling through water. Like ocean waves,
electromagnetic energy is characterized by wavelength ( λ), and frequency
(υ).
Electric field
Direction
Magnetic fieldWavelength
fig-1: An electromagnetic wave
Structure of Atom 162 X ClassThe wavelength ( λ) of the wave is the distance from one wave peak to
the next. The frequency ( υ) of a wave is simply the number of wave peaks
that pass by a given point per unit time, expressed in units of reciprocal
seconds (1/s or s–1). The relation between these quantities is given by
λα 1/υor  c = υλ
•Can we apply this equation to a sound wave?
Yes. It is a universal relationship and applies to all waves. As the
frequency increases, the wavelength becomes smaller.
Electromagnetic waves can have a wide variety of frequencies. The
entire range of electromagnetic wave frequencies is known as the
electromagnetic spectrum .
The familiar example of the visible spectrum in  nature is the formation
of a rainbow.
Each colour in a rainbow is characterized by a specified wavelength
from red (higher wavelength) to violet (shorter wavelength). These colours
(wavelengths), that the human naked eye is sensitive to, are called visible
light. The range of wavelengths covering red colour to violet colour is
called the visible spectrum .
•Are there any other wavelengths of light other than visible spectrum?
Electromagnetic spectrum
Electromagnetic waves can have a wide variety of wavelengths. The
entire range of wavelengths is known as the electromagnetic spectrum.
The electromagnetic spectrum consists of a continuous range of
wavelengths of gamma rays at the shorter wavelength to radio waves at thelonger wavelength. But our eyes are sensitive only to visible light.
fig-2: Electromagnetic SpectrumCosmic
raysγ−raysx-rays
UV IRMicro
wavesRadio Broadcast
band
Ultraviolet (UV)
raysInfrared (IR) raysVisible light10-12 m
Short wavelength Long wavelength
400 nm 500 nm 600 nm 700 nm10-9 m
1 nm10 -6 m
1000 nm10-3 m
1 mm100 m
1 m103 m
1 km
Radar
Free distribution by A.P. Government 163•What happens when you heat an iron rod on a flame?
•Do you find any change in colour on heating an iron rod?
When you heat an iron rod, some of the heat energy is emitted as
light. First it turns red (lower energy corresponding to higher wavelength)
and as the temperature rises it glows orange, yellow, blue(higher energy
and of lower wavelength) or even white (all visible wavelengths) if the
temperature is high enough.
•Do you observe any other colour at the same time when one colour is
emitted?
When the temperature is high enough, other colours will also be
emitted, but due to higher intensity of one particular emitted colour
(e.g., red), others cannot be observed.
Max Planck broke with the ‘continuous energy’ tradition of
electromagnetic energy by assuming that the energy is always emitted in
multiples of h υ;
For example: h υ, 2 hυ, 3 hυ... nh υ
That is, the energy for a certain frequency E can be represented by the
equation E = hυ, where ‘h’ is Planck’ s constant  which has the value
6.626 X 10-34Js and ‘ υ’ is the frequency of the radiation absorbed or
emitted.
The energy (E) for the red colour (higher wavelength or lower
frequency) is lower compared to the energy of blue colour (lower
wavelength or higher frequency). The energy emitted from a material body
increases with increase in heat energy.
The significance of Planck’s proposal is that, electromagnetic energy
can be gained or lost in discrete values and not in a continuous manner .
Hence, emission or absorption of light spectrum is a collection of a
group of wavelengths.
•Do you enjoy Deepavali fireworks?
Variety of colours is seen from fireworks.
•How do these colours come from fireworks?
Activity  2
Take a pinch of cupric chloride in a watch glass and make a paste with
concentrated hydrochloric acid. Take this paste on a platinum loop and
introduce it into a non-luminous flame.
•What colour do you observe?
Carry out similar activity with strontium chloride.
Structure of Atom 164 X ClassCupric chloride produces a green colour
flame while strontium chloride produces a
crimson red flame.
• Do you observe yellow light in street lamps?
Sodium vapours produce yellow light in street
lamps.•  Why do different elements emit different flame
colours when heated by the same non-luminous
flame?
Scientists found that each element emits its
own characteristic colour. These colourscorrespond to certain discrete wavelengths of
light and are called line spectra .
The lines in atomic spectra can be used to
identify unknown atoms, just like fingerprints are
used to identify people.
Bohr’s model of hydrogen atom and its
limitations
Let us examine the spectrum of hydrogen
atom.
• What does a line spectrum tell
us about the structure of an atom?
Niels Bohr proposed that
electrons in an atom occupy
‘stationary’ orbits (states) of fixed
energy at different distances from
the nucleus.
When an electron ‘jumps’ from
a lower energy state (ground state) to higher energy states (excited state)
it absorbs energy or emits energy when such a jump occurs from a higher
energy state   to a lower energy state.
The energies of an electron in an atom can have only certain values
E1, E2, E3 ……; that is, the energy is quantized. The states corresponding
to these energies are called stationary states and the possible values of
the energy are called energy levels.
•The lowest energy state of the electron is known as ground state.
•What happens when an electron gains energy?The electron moves to a higher energy level, the excited state.
fig-3: Hydrogen SpectrumNiels Henrik David
Bohr  was a Danish  physicist
 who made foundational
contributions to
understanding  atomic
structure and quantum theory,
for which he received
the Nobel Prize in Physics in
1922. Bohr was also
a philosopher and a promoter.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 165•Does the electron retain the energy forever?
The electron loses the energy and comes back to its ground state. The
energy emitted by the electron is seen in the form of electromagnetic
energy and when the wavelength is in the visible region it is visible as an
emission line .
Bohr’s model explains all the line spectra observed in the case of
hydrogen atom. It is a successful model as far as line spectra of hydrogen
atom is concerned.
But the line spectrum of hydrogen atom when observed through a high
resolution spectroscope appears as groups of finer lines.
•Did Bohr’s model account for the splitting of line spectra of a hydrogen
atom into finer lines?
Bohr’s model failed to account for splitting of line spectra.
Bohr-Sommerfeld model of an atom
In an attempt to account for the structure (splitting) of line spectra
known as fine spectra, Sommerfeld modified Bohr’s atomic model by
adding elliptical orbits. While retaining the first of Bohr’s circular orbit
as such, he added one elliptical orbit to Bohr’s second orbit, two elliptical
orbits to Bohr’s third orbit, etc., such that the nucleus of the atom is one
of the principal foci of these elliptical orbits. He was guided by the fact
that, in general, periodic motion under the influence of a central force
will lead to elliptical orbits with the force situated at one of the foci.
Bohr-Sommerfeld model, though successful in accounting for the fine
line structure of hydrogen atomic spectra, does not provide a satisfactory
picture of the structure of atom in general.
This model failed to account for the atomic spectra of atoms of more
than one electron.
•Why is the electron in an atom restricted to revolve around the nucleus
at certain fixed distances?fig-4: The allowed electronic orbits for the main Quantum numbers by Bohr - Sommerfeld model
l=0l=1l=0
l=2l=1l=0
l=3l=2l=1l=0
n=1 n=2 n=3 n=4
Structure of Atom 166 X ClassQuantum mechanical model of an atom
•Do the electrons follow defined paths around the nucleus?
If the electron revolves around the nucleus in defined paths or orbits,
the exact position of the electron at various times will be known. For that
we have to answer two questions:
•What is the velocity of the electron?
•Is it possible to find the exact position of the electron?Electrons are invisible to naked eye. Then, how do you find the position
and velocity of an electron?
To find articles during dark nights we take the help of torchlight.
Similarly, we can take the help of suitable light to find the position and
velocity of electron. As the electrons are very small, light of very shortwavelength is required for this task.
This short wavelength light interacts with the electron and disturbs the
motion of the electron. Hence, simultaneously the position and velocityof electron cannot be measured accurately.
From the above discussion, it is clear that electrons do not follow
definite paths in an atom.
Do atoms have a definite boundary, as suggested by Bohr’s model?
If the electrons are not distributed in orbits around the nucleus this
means that an atom does not have a definite boundary.
As a result, it is not possible to pinpoint an electron in an atom.Under these circumstances in order to understand the properties of
electrons in an atom, a quantum mechanical model of atom was developed
by Erwin Schrodinger.
According to this model of an atom, instead of orbits of Bohr’s model,
the electrons are thought to exist in a particular region of space around thenucleus at a given instant of time
•What do we call the region of space where the electron might be, at a
given time?
The region of space around the nucleus where the probability of finding
the electron is maximum is called an orbital.Max Karl Ernst Ludwig Planck was
a German theoretical physicist who originated quantum
theory , which won him the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1918.
Planck made many contributions to theoretical physics, but
his fame rests primarily on his role as originator of the
quantum theory . This theory revolutionized human
understanding of atomic and subatomic processes.

Free distribution by A.P. Government 167In a given space around the nucleus, only certain orbitals can exist.
Each orbital of a stable energy state for the electron is described by a
particular set of quantum numbers.
Quantum numbers
Each electron in an atom is described by a set of three numbers n, l,
and ml .These numbers are called quantum numbers . These numbers
indicate the probability of finding the electron in the space around thenucleus.
•What information do the quantum numbers provide?
The quantum numbers describe the space around the nucleus where
the electrons are found and also their energies. These are called atomic
orbitals.
•What does each quantum number signify?
1.  Principal Quantum Number (n)
The principal  quantum number is related to the size and energy of the
main shell .
‘n’ has positive integer values of 1, 2, 3,…
As ‘n’ increases, the shells become larger and the electrons in those
shells are farther from the nucleus.
An increase in ‘ n’ also means higher energy. n  = 1, 2, 3, ...  are often
represented by the letters K, L, M… For each ‘n’ value there is one main
shell.
  Shell K L M N
      n 1234
2.  The angular - momention quantum number ( l)
‘l’ has integer values from 0 to n-1 for each value of ‘ n’. Each ‘ l’ value
represents one sub-shell.
Each value of ‘ l’ is related to the shape of a particular sub-shell in the
space around the nucleus.
The value of ‘ l’ for a particular sub-shell is generally designated by the
letters s, p, d  . . . as follows:
     l 0123
Name of the sub-shell  s pdf
When n = 1, there is only one sub-shell with l = 0. This is designated
as ‘1s’ orbital.
When n = 2, there are two sub-shells, with l = 0, the ‘2 s’ sub-shell and
with l = 1, the ‘2 p’ sub-shell.
Structure of Atom 168 X Class•What is the maximum value of ‘ l’ for n=4?
•How many values can ‘ l’ have for n = 4?
3.  The magnetic quantum number (ml)
The magnetic quantum number (ml) has integer values between - l and
l, including zero. Thus for a certain value of l, there are (2 l +1) integer
values of ml as follows:
-l, (-l+1) . . ., –1, 0, 1, . . . (+ l - 1), +l
These values describe the orientation of the orbital in space relative to
the other orbitals in the atom.
When l = 0, (2 l+ 1) = 1 and there is only one value of ml, thus we have
only one  orbital i.e., 1s.
When l= 1, (2 l+ 1) = 3, that means ml has three values, namely, -1, 0,
and 1 or three p orbitals, with different orientations along x, y, z  axes.
These are labelled as px, py, and pz.
•Do these three p-orbitals have the same
energy?
The number of ‘ml’ values indicates the
number of orbitals in a sub-shell with a particular
l value. Orbitals in the sub-shell belonging to
the same shell possess same energy.
Fill the table-1 with the number of orbitals
per sub-shell using (2 l+1) rule.
s-orbital is spherical in shape, p-orbital is
dumbell-shaped and d-orbital are double dumbell-shaped as shown below.Table-1
l Sub-shell Number of
orbitals
0s
1p
2d3 f
fig-5: Shapes of orbitals in s, p and d subshells
Free distribution by A.P. Government 169The following table-2 represents the shells, sub-shells and the number
of orbitals in the sub-shells.
Table-2
Each sub-shell holds a
maximum of twice as many
electrons as the number oforbitals in the sub-shell.
The maximum number of
electrons that can occupy
various sub-shells is given in the
following table.
4. Spin Quantum Number (ms)
The three quantum numbers n, l, and ml describe the size (energy),
shape, and orientation, respectively, of an atomic orbital in space.
As you have observed in the case of street lights (sodium vapour lamp),
yellow light is emitted. This yellow light is comprised of a very closely
spaced doublet when analyzed using high resolution spectroscope.
 Alkali and alkaline earth metals show such type of lines.
To account for such a behavior of electron an additional quantum
number is introduced. This is spin quantum number. This represents the
property of the electron. It is denoted by ‘ ms’.Table-3
Sub shells Number of Maximum
orbitals (2 l+1) number of
electrons
s (1=0) 1 2
p (1=1) 3 6
d (1=2) 5 10
f (l=3) 7 14n l mlsub-shell notation No of orbitals
in the subshell
10 0 1 s 1
200 2 s1
1 -1,0,+1 2p 3
00 3 s1
3 1 -1,0,+1 3p 3
2 -2,-1,0,+1,+2 3d 500 4 s1
41 -1,0,+1 4p 3
2 -2,-1,0,+1,+2 4d 5
3 -3,-2,-1,0,+1,+2,+3 4f 7
Structure of Atom 170 X ClassThis quantum number refers to the two possible orientations of the
spin of an electron, one clockwise and the other anticlockwise spin. These
are represented by +1/2 and -1/2. If both are positive values, then the spinsare parallel otherwise the spins are anti-parallel.
The importance of the spin quantum number is seen when electrons
occupy specific orbitals in multi-electron atoms.
•How do electrons in an atom occupy shells, sub-shells and orbitals?The distribution of electrons in shells,    sub-shells and orbital in an
atom is known as electronic configuration .
Electronic Configuration
Let us first consider the hydrogen atom for understanding the
arrangement of electrons, as it contains only one electron.
The shorthand notation consists of the principal energy level ( n value),
the letter representing sub-level ( l value), and the number of electrons ( x)
in the sub-shell is written as a superscript as shown below:
nl x
For the hydrogen (H) atom having atomic number (Z) = 1, the number
of electrons is one, then the electronic configuration is 1s1.
The electron configuration can also be represented by showing the
spin of the electron.
For the electron in H, as you have seen, the set of quantum numbers is:
n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = ½ or – ½.

For many-electron atoms, we must know the electron configuration
of the atom. The distribution of electrons in various atomic orbitals
provides an understanding of the electronic behavior of the atom and, in
turn, its reactivity. Let us consider the helium (He) atom.
•Helium (Z=2) atom has two electrons.
•How are these two electrons arranged?
To describe the electronic configuration for more than one electron
in the atom, we need to know three principles:
Those are the Pauli Exclusion Principle, Aufbau principle and Hund’ s Rule.
 Let us discuss them briefly.Denotes the principle
quantum numberDenotes the number of
electrons in orbital
Denotes the angular momentum
quantum number1s1
Free distribution by A.P. Government 171The Pauli Exclusion Principle
Helium atom has two electrons. The first electron occupies ‘1s’ orbital.
The second electron joins the first in the 1s-orbital, so the electron
configuration of the ground state of ‘He’ is 1s2.
•Then the question is: What are the spins of these two electrons?
According to Pauli Exclusion Principle no two electrons of the same
atom can have all four quantum numbers the same.
If n, l, and ml are same for two electrons then ms must be different. In
the helium atom the spins must be paired.
Electrons with paired spins are denoted by ‘ ’. One electron has
ms= +1/2, the other has     ms= –1/2. They have anti-parallel spins.
•How many electrons can occupy an orbital?The major consequence of the exclusion principle involves orbital
occupancy. Since only two values of m
s are allowed, an orbital can hold
only two electrons and they must have opposite spins.
Hence, the electronic configuration of helium atom is:
 1s2
Aufbau Principle
As we pass from one element to another one of next higher atomic
number, one electron is added every time to the atom.
The maximum number of electrons in any shell is ‘2n2’, where ‘n’ is
the principal quantum number.
The maximum number of electrons in a sub-shell (s, p, d or f) is equal
to 2(2 l+1) where l = 0, 1, 2, 3… Thus these sub-shells can have a maximum
of 2, 6, 10, and 14 electrons respectively.
In the ground state the electronic configuration can be built up by
placing electrons in the lowest available orbitals until the total number of
electrons added is equal to the atomic number. This is called the Aufbauprinciple (The German word “Aufbau” means “building up.”).Thus orbitalsare filled in the order of increasing energy.
Two general rules help us to predict electronic configurations.
1. Electrons are assigned to orbitals in order of increasing value of (n+ l).
2. For sub-shells with the same value of  (n+l), electrons are assigned
first to the sub-shell with lower ‘ n’.

Structure of Atom 172 X ClassThe following diagram shows the increasing
value of (n+l). Ascending order of energies of
various atomic orbitals is given below.
1s < 2s < 2p < 3s < 3p < 4s < 3d < 4p < 5s <
4d < 5p < 6s < 4f < 5d < 6p < 7s < 5f < 6d < 7p <
8s …
The electronic configuration of some elements
in the increasing atomic number (Z) value is given
below.
fig-6: The filling order of
atomic orbitals
(Moeller Chart)





•For carbon (C) atom (Z=6), where does the 6th electron go?
•Whether the electron pairs up in the same p-orbital or will it go to the
next p-orbital?
Hund’s Rule
According to this rule electron pairing in orbitals starts only when all
available empty orbitals of the same energy ( degenerate orbitals ) are singly
occupied.
The configuration of Carbon (C) atom (Z=6) is 1s22s22p2. The first four
electrons go into the 1 s and 2 s orbitals. The next two electrons go into separate
2p orbitals, with both electrons having the same spin
Note that the unpaired electrons in the 2 p orbitals are shown with parallel
spins.H(Z=1)     1s1
He(Z=2)   1s2
Li(Z=3)    1s22s1
Be(Z=4)    1s22s2
B(Z=5)     1s22s22p1
Free distribution by A.P. Government 173Activity  3
Complete the electronic configuration of the following elements.
Table.4
Element Atomic  number (Z) Electronic configuration of elements
C6
N7
O8
F9Ne 10
Na 11
Mg 12Al 13
Si 14
P1 5S1 6
Cl 17
Ar 18
K1 9Ca 20
Key words
Wave, spectrum, intensity, discrete energy, line spectrum, orbital, quantum numbers,
shell, sub-shell, shapes of orbitals electron spin, electronic configuration,  the Pauli’s
exclusion principle, Aufbau principle, Hund’s rule.
What we have learnt
•Light can be characterized by its wavelength (λ) and frequency (υ), and these quantities are
related to the speed of light (c)  as: c = υλ.
•Spectrum is a group of wavelengths.
•Electromagnetic energy (Light) can have only certain discrete energy values which is given by
the equation   E=h υ
•Electrons in an atom can gain energy by absorbing a particular frequency of light and can loseenergy by emitting a particular frequency.
Structure of Atom 174 X ClassImprove your learning
•Bohr’s model of atom: Electrons are present in stationary states. The electron moves to higher
energy level if it absorbs energy in the form of electromagnetic energy or moves to a lowerenergy state by emitting energy in the form of electromagnetic energy of appropriate frequency.
•Atomic line spectra arise because of absorption /emission of certain frequencies of light energy.
•It is not possible to measure accurately the position and velocity of an electron simultaneously.
•The space around the nucleus where the probability of finding the electron is maximum is calledorbital.
•The three quantum numbers n, l, m
l describe the energy, shape and orientation respectively, of
an atomic orbital.
•Spin is an intrinsic property of an electron.
•The arrangement of electrons in shells, sub-shells and orbitals in an atom is called the electronconfiguration.
•According to Pauli Exclusion Principle no two electrons of the same atom can have all the fourquantum numbers same.
•Aufbau principle: The lowest-energy orbitals are filled first.
•Hund’s rule: The orbitals of equal energy (degenerate) are occupied with one electron eachbefore pairing of electrons starts.
1. What information does the electronic configuration of an atom provide? (AS1)
2. a. How many maximum number of electrons that can be accommodated in a principal energy
shell?
b. How many maximum number of electrons that can be accommodated in a sub shell?
c. How many maximum number of electrons can be accommodated in an orbital?
d. How many sub shells present in a principal energy shell?e. How many spin orientations are possible for an electron in an orbital?
3. In an atom the number electrons in M-shell is equal to the number of electrons in the K and L
shell. Answer the following questions.  (AS1)a. Which is the outer most shell?b. How many electrons are there in its outermost shell?
c. What is the atomic number of element?
d. Write the electronic configuration of the element.
4. Rainbow is an example for continuous spectrum – explain.(AS1)
5. How many elliptical orbits are added by Sommerfeld in third Bohr’s orbit? What was the
purpose of adding these elliptical orbits?(AS1)
6. What is absorption spectrum?
7. What is an orbital? How is it different from Bohr’s orbit?(AS1)
8. Explain the significance of three Quantum numbers in predicting the positions of an electron in
an atom.(AS1)
9. What is n l
x method? How it is useful? (AS1)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 175Multiple choice questionsFill in the blanks10. Following orbital diagram shows the electron configuration of nitrogen atom. Which rule does
not support this? (AS1)
N (Z = 7)
                             1s2             2s2                      2p3
11. Which rule is violated in the electronic configuration 1s0 2s2 2p4 ?
12. Writ e the four quantum numbers for the differentiating electron of sodium (Na) atom? (AS1)
13. What is emisssion spectrum?
14. i. An electron in an atom has the following set of four quantum numbers to which orbital it belong
   to: (AS2)
n l mlms
200+  ½
       ii. Write the four quantum numbers for 1s1 electron.(AS1)
15. Which electronic shell is at a higher energy level K or L? (AS2)16. Collect the information regarding wave lengths and corresponding frequencies of three primary
colours red, blue and green. (AS4)
17. The wave length of a radio wave is 1.0m. Find its frequency.(AS7)
1. If n = 1 then angular momentum quantum number ( l)  = ....................
2. If a sub-shell is denoted as 2p then its magnetic quantum number values are ......., ......, ........
3. Maximum number of electrons that an M-shell contain is/are .....................4. For ‘n’, the minimum value is …………… and the maximum value is ……………..
5. For ‘ l’, the minimum value is …………..and the maximum value is ………….
6. For ‘m
l’ the minimum value is ………… and the maximum value is ………….
7. The value of ‘ms’ for an electron spinning in clock-wise direction is ……………… and for
anti-clockwise direction is ……….
1. An emission spectrum consists of bright spectral lines on a dark back ground. Which one of the
following does not correspond to the bright spectral lines? [ ]
a) Frequency of emitted radiation b) Wave length of emitted radiation
c) Energy of emitted radiations d) Velocity of light
2. The maximum number of electrons that can be accommodated in the L – shell of an atom is :
a)  2 b) 4 c) 8 d) 16 [ ]
3. If  l = 1 for an atom then the number of orbitals in its sub-shell is [ ]
a) 1 b) 2 c) 3 d) 0
4. The quantum number which explains about size and energy of the orbit or shell is: [ ]
a) n b) l c) mld) ms
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 176 X ClassA medical shop contains a vast number of medicines. The shop keeper
finds difficult or impossible to remember all the names of medicines that
he has. When you go to a medical shop and ask the shopkeeper for a
particular medicine, he hands over it to you without any difficulty. How is
it possible?
Think of a super bazaar. When you step inside you see a particular
arrangement of goods inside it. When you look for grocery that you need,you go to it and select what you want. In what way it makes your selection
easy?
From the above observations you understand that for any system
involving several things, a particular order of arrangement of those things
is essential.
Even in chemistry, from the earliest times, scientists have been trying
to classify the available elements on the basis of their properties.
Need for the arrangement of elements in an organised manner
Robert Boyle (1661) defined an element as any substance that cannot
be decomposed into a further simple substance by a physical or chemical
change.
At his time, about thirteen elements were known.
Towards the end of the eighteenth century, by the time of Lavoisier
another eleven elements were discovered. By 1865 about sixty three
elements were known and by 1940, a total of ninety one elements from
natural sources and another seventeen elements synthetically were
obtained.Classification of Elements-
The Periodic Table9Chapter

Free distribution by A.P. Government 177By now, including synthetic elements, there are more than 115
elements. As the number of elements increased, it became difficult to
keep in memory the chemistries of individual elements and theircompounds.
In previous classes we learnt that elements were classified into metals
and non-metals. But this classification had so many limitations. So, therewas a need to classify them in other ways. Hence, chemists started toframe ways to group these elements and compounds on the basis of their
physical and chemical properties.
In the beginning of the 18
th century Joseph Louis Proust stated that
hydrogen atom is the building material and atoms of all other elements
are simply due to the combination of number of hydrogen atoms. (It is to
be noted that at his time the atomic weights of all elements were given as
whole numbers and the atomic weight of hydrogen was taken as one.)
Dobereiner’s law of Triads
A German chemist Johann Wolfgang Döbereiner (1829) noted that
there were groups of elements with three elements known as triads in
each group with similar chemical properties.  He tried to give a relationship
between the properties of elments and their atomic weights.
Döbereiner stated that when elements with similar properties are taken
three at a time and arranged in the ascending order of their atomic weights,the atomic weight of the middle element is the average of the atomic
weights of the first and third elements. This statement is called the
Dobereiner’s  law of triads .
Activity 1
Observe the following table.
Elements in each row represent a triad.
Group Elements and their Atomic weight Arithmetic mean of Atomic weight
A Lithium (Li) Sodium (Na) Potassium (K)
7.0 23.0 39.0
B Calcium (Ca) Strontium(Sr) Barium (Ba)
40.0 87.5 137.0
C Chlorine (C l) Bromine (Br) Iodine (I)
35.5 80.0 127.0
D Sulphur (S) Selenium (Se) T ellurium (Te)
32.0 78.0 125.0
E Manganese(Mn) Chromium(Cr) Iron (Fe)
55.0 52.0 56.0    7.0 + 39.0   –––––––––    = 23.0            2
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 178 X ClassIn the first row you will find that atomic weight of sodium (Na) is
equal to the average of relative atomic weight of Li and K.
•Can you establish the same relationship with the set of elements given
in the remaining rows?
•Find average atomic weights of the first and thired elements in eachrow and compare it with the atomic weight of the middle element.
•What do you observe?
Döbereiner’s attempts gave a clue that atomic weights could be
correlated with properties of elements. It made chemists look
at elements in terms of groups of elements with similar chemical and
physical properties. This eventually led to rigorous classificationof elements and the modern periodic table of elements.
Limitations  
i. All the known elements at that time could not be arranged in the form of triads.
ii. The law failed for very low mass or for very high mass elements. 
In case of F, C l, Br, the atomic weight of C l is not an arithmetic mean
of atomic weights of F and Br.
iii. As the techniques improved for measuring atomic masses accurately,
the law was unable to remain strictly valid.
Newlands’ law of Octaves
John Newlands was a British chemist. Newlands (1865) found that
when elements were arranged in the ascending order of their atomic weights
they appeared to fall into seven groups. Each group contained elements
with similar chemical properties. Based on these observations, Newlands
proposed the law of octaves.
The law of octaves  states that when elements are arranged in the
ascending order of their atomic weights they fall into a pattern in which
their properties repeat at regular intervals. Every eighth element startingfrom a given element resembles in its properties to that of the starting
element.
Think and discuss
•What relation about elements did Döbereiner want to establish?
•The densities of calcium (Ca) and barium (Ba) are 1.55 and 3.51 gcm-3
respectively. Based on Dobereiner’s law of triads can you give the
approximate density of strontium (Sr)?
Free distribution by A.P. Government 179H1
Li 2G3
Bo 4
C5N6
O7F8
Na 9Mg 10
Al 11
Si 12P1 3
S1 4Cl15
K1 6
Ca 17
Cr 19
Ti 1 8Mn 20
Fe 21Co&Ni 22
Cu 23
Zn 24
Y2 5
In 26As 27
Se 28Br 29
Rb 30Sr 31
Ce&La 33
Zr 32
Di&Mo 34
Ro&Ru 35Pd 36
Ag 3 7
Cd 38U4 0Sn 39
Sb 41Te 4 3I4 2
Cs 44
Ba&V 45
Ta 4 6
W4 7
Nb 48
Au 4 9Pt&Ir 50
Os 51
Hg 52
Tl 53
Pb 54Bi 55
Th 5 6Table 1:   Newlands’ table of elements.
Elements with similar chemical properties are to be present along a
horizantal row.
Newlands was the first to assign atomic numbers to the elements.
Unfortunately his work was neither accepted by his seniors nor by the
journal of the Chemical society, which rejected its publication.
In Newlands’ table of elements, if we start with hydrogen and move
down and then start at the top the eighth element is fluorine and next eighthelement is chlorine and so on. The properties hydrogen, fluorine and
chlorine are similar.
Similarly, if you start at lithium, then eighth element is sodium and
next coming eighth is potassium and so on. These elements show similar
physical and chemical properties.
Newlands’ table is not without problems.
•There are instances of two elements fitted into the same slot, e.g.cobalt and nickel.
•Certain elements, totally dissimilar in their properties, were fitted intothe same group,
Think and discuss
•Do you know why Newlands proposed the law of octaves? Explain your
answer in terms of the modern structure of the atom.
•Do you think that Newlands’  law of octaves is correct? JustifyElement  No. Element  No. Element  No. Element  No. Element  No. Element  No. Element  No. Element  No.
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 180 X ClassFor example he arranged Co, Ni, Pd, Pt and Ir which have different
properties compared with halogens in the same row (F, C l, Br, I). (see
Newlands’ first horizontal row)
It was found that the law of octaves holds good only for the elements
up to calcium. The law was not valid for elements that had atomic masses
higher than calcium.
Newlands periodic table was restricted to only 56 elements and did
not leave any room for new elements. Elements that were discovered later
could not be fitted into Newlands table in accordance with their properties.
Newlands attempted to link the periodicity of the chemical properties
of elements with the periodicity found in the music. In musical scale any
note in a key is separated from its octave by an interval of seven notes.This must have made him to force all the elements into this active pattern
sometimes without caring the similarities.
Mendeleeff’s Periodic Table
Mendeleeff arranged the elements known at that time in a chart in a
systematic order in the increasing order of their atomic weights. He divided
the chart into 8 vertical columns known as groups .  Each group is divided
into A, B sub groups. Each column contained elements of similar chemical
properties.
The elements in the first column, for example, react with oxygen to
form compounds with the general formula R2O. For example, Li, Na and K
when react with oxygen and form compounds Li2O, Na2O and K2O
respectively.
Elements of the second column react with oxygen to form compounds
with the general formula RO. For example, Be, Mg and Ca when react withoxygen form BeO, MgO and CaO.
Mendeleeff tried to explain the similarities of elements in the same
group in terms of their common valency.
Do you know?
Are you familiar with musical notes?
In the Indian system of music, there are seven musical notes in a scale – sa, re
ga, ma, pa, da, ni. In the west, they use the notations -  do, re, mi, fa, so, la, ti.
Naturally, there must be some repetition of notes. Every eighth note is similar to
the first one and it is the first note of the next scale.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 181Gruppe I.
–
R2OGruppe II.
–
ROGruppe III.
–
R2O3Gruppe IV.
RH4
RO2Gruppe V.
RH3
R2O5Gruppe VI.
RH2
RO3Gruppe VII.
RH
R2H7Gruppe VIII.
–––
RO4Reihen
1         H = 1
2 Li=7 Be=9.4 B=11 C=12 N=14 O=16 F=19
3       Na=23 Mg=24     Al=27.3 Si=28 P=31 S=32 Cl=35.5
4 K=39 Ca=40 –=44 Ti=48 V=51 Cr=52 Mn=55 Fo=56, Co=59
Ni=59, Cu=63
5 (Cu=63) Zn=65 –=68 –=72 As=75 So=78 Br=80
6 Rb=85 Sr=87 ?Yt=88 Zr=90 Nb=94 Mo=96 –=100 Ru= 104, Rh=104
Pd=106, Ag=108
7 (Ag=10 8) Cd=112 In=113 Sn=118 Sb=122 T e=125 J=127
8 Cs=133 Ba=137 ?Di=138 ?Ce=140 – – – –  –  –  –
9 (–) – – – – – –
10 – – ?Ek=178 ?La=180 T a=182 W=184 – Os=195, Ir=197,
Pt=198, Au=199
11 (Au=198) Hg=200 Tl=204 Pb=207 Bi=208 – –
12 – – – Th=231 – U=240 – –  –  –  –The Periodic Law
Based on Mendeleeff’s observations regarding the properties of
elements in the periodic table, a law known as the periodic law  of the
properties of elements was proposed as follows.
The law states that the physical and chemical properties of the elements
are a periodic function of their atomic weights.
Table-2 : Mendeleeff’s Periodic Table (1871 version)
Salient features and achievements of the Mendeleeff’s periodic
table
1. Groups and sub-groups: There are eight vertical columns in
Mendeleeff’s periodic table called as groups.  They are represented
by Roman numerals I to VIII. Elements present in a given vertical
column (group) have similar properties. Each group is divided into
two sub-groups ‘A’ and ‘B’. The elements within any sub-groupresemble one another to great a extent. For example, sub-group IAelements called ‘alkali metals’ (Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs, Fr) resemble eachother very much in their properties.
2. Periods: The horizontal rows in Mendeleeff’s periodic table are called
periods . There are seven periods in the table, which are denoted by
Arabic numerals 1 to 7. Elements in a period differ in their propertiesfrom one another. A period comprises the entire range of elements
after which properties repeat themselves.
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 182 X Class3. Predicting the properties of missing elements: Based on the
arrangement of the elements in the table he predicted that some
elements were missing and left blank spaces at the appropriate places
in the table.
Mendeleeff believed that some new elements would be discovered
definitely. He predicted the properties of these new additional elements
in advance purely depending on his table. His predicted properties were
almost the same as the observed properties of those elements after theirdiscovery.
He named those elements tentatively by adding the prefix ‘ eka’ (eka
is a Sanskrit word for numeral one ) to the name of the element
immediately above each empty space. The predicted  properties of elementsnamely eka-boron, eka-aluminium and eka-silicon were close to the
observed properties of scandium, gallium and germanium respectively
which were discovered later.
4. Correction of atomic weights: The placement of elements in
Mendeleeff’s periodic table helped in correcting the atomic masses
of some elements like, beryllium, indium and gold.
For example, At the time of Mendeleeff, beryllium (Be) was given
atomic weight 13.5.
Atomic weight = equivalent weight × valency
The equivalent weight of Be was found experimentally as 4.5 and its
valency was thought as 3. Therefore, the atomic weight of berylliumwas given as 4.5 × 3 = 13.5. With this atomic weight it had to be placed
in a wrong group in the table. He said that its valency should be only 2.Then its atomic weight would be 4.5 × 2 = 9. If atomic weight of ‘Be’
Do you know?
Do you know what Mendeleeff said about the melting point of eka Al ?
‘If I hold it in my hand, it will melt’. The melting point of Ga is 30.2oC and our
body temprature 37oC.S.
No.Property Predicted property by
MendeleeffObserved property
Eka-Aluminium (Ea) Eka-Silico n (Es) Gallium (1875) Germanium (1886)
1 Atomic weight 68 72 69.72 72.59
2 Density 5.9 5..5 5.94 5.47
3 Formula of  oxide Ea2O3EsO2Ga2O3GeO2
4 Formula of chloride EaCl3EsCl4GaCl3GeCl4
Free distribution by A.P. Government 183is 9 it would be fit in the second group and its properties practically
are similar to Mg, Ca etc., of the second group elements. He also
helped in the calculation of the correct atomic weights of ‘Indium’
and ‘Gold’ in this manner.
5. Anomalous series: Some anomalous series of elements like ‘Te’ and
‘I’ were observed in the table. The anomalous series contained elements
with more atomic weights like ‘Te’ (127.6 U) placed before the
elements with less atomic weights like ‘I’ (126.9 U). Mendeleeff
accepted minor inversions in the order of increasing atomic weightsas these inversions resulted in elements being placed in the correct
groups.
It was the extraordinary thinking of Mendeleeff that made the chemists
to accept the periodic table and recognise Mendeleeff more than anyone
else as the originator of the periodic law.
Limitations of Mendeleeff’s periodic table
1. Anomalous pair of elements:  Certain elements of highest atomic
weights precede those with lower atomic weights.
For example, tellurium  (atomic weight 127.6) precedes iodine  (atomic
weight 126.9).
2. Dissimilar elements placed together: elements with dissimilar
properties were placed in same group as sub-group A and sub-group B.
For example, alkali metal like Li, Na, K etc., of IA group have little
resemblance with coinage metals like Cu, Ag, Au of IB group.C l is of
VII a group and ‘Mn’ is of VII B, but chlorine is a non metal, where as
manganese is a metal.
Do you know?
At the time when Mendeleeff introduced his periodic table even electrons were
not discovered.  Even then the periodic table was able to provide a scientific base
for the study of chemistry of elements. In his honour the 101th element was named
Mendelevium .
Think and discuss
•Why Mendeleeff had to leave certain blank spaces in his periodic table?
What is your explanation for this?
•What is your understanding about Ea2O3, EsO2?
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 184 X ClassModern Periodic Table
H.J. Moseley (1913) found that each element emits a characteristic
pattern of X-rays when subjected to bombardment by high energy
electrons. By analyzing the X-ray patterns, Moseley was able to calculatethe number of positive charges in the atoms of respective elements. The
number of positive charges (protons) in the atom of an element is called
the atomic number of the element. With this analysis Moseley realised
that the atomic number is more fundamental characteristic of an element
than its atomic weight.
After knowing the atomic numbers of elements, it was recognized that
a better way of arranging the elements in the periodic table is according to
the increasing atomic number. This arrangement eliminated the problemof anomalous series. For example, though tellurium (Te) has more atomicweight than iodine (I), it has  atomic number less by one unit compared to
iodine. This atomic number concept forced the periodic law to be changed.
The periodic law is changed from atomic weight concept to atomic
number concept and now it is called the modern periodic law .
We know that Mendeleeff’s periodic law is stated as “The properties
of elements are the periodic functions of their atomic weights”.  Now, letus try to understand modern periodic law.
The modern periodic law may stated as “the properties of the elements
are periodic function of their atomic numbers.”
Based on the modern periodic law, the modern periodic table which is
given here (page 186) is proposed. It is the extension of the originalMendeleeff’s periodic table known as short form of the table and this
modern table is called the long form of the periodic table. It is given in
fig (2). Atomic number of an element (Z) indicates not only the positivecharges i.e., the protons in the nucleus of the atom of the element but alsothe number of electrons in the neutral atom of that element.
Think and discuss
•All alkali metals are solids but hydrogen is a gas with diatomic
molecules. Do you justify the inclusion of hydrogen in first group withalkali metals?
Free distribution by A.P. Government 185The physical and chemical properties of atoms of the elements depend
not on the number of protons but on the number of electrons and their
arrangements (electronic configurations) in atoms. Therefore, the modern
periodic law may be stated as “The physical and chemical properties of
elements are the periodic function of the electronic configurations oftheir atoms.”
Positions of elements in the Modern Periodic Table
The modern periodic table has eighteen vertical columns known as
groups  and seven horizontal rows known as periods.
Let us see what decides the position of an element in modern periodic
table.
We can explain the classification of the elements in the  modern
periodic table in terms of certain electron arrangements which are
periodically repeated. The elements with similar outer shell (valence shell)electronic configurations in their atoms are in the same column called
group . Elements listed in a group down to it are in the order of their
increasing principal quantum numbers.
In the chapter ‘Structure of atom’ you have learnt that ‘s’ sub-shell
with one orbital contains a maximum of two electrons. Each ‘p’ sub-shellcontains 3 orbitals and accommodates a maximum of six electrons. The‘d’
sub-shell contains 5 orbitals and accommodates a maximum of 10 electronsand ‘f’ sub-shell contains 7 orbitals with 14 electrons maximum. Depending
upon to which sub-shell the differentiating electron. i.e., the last coming
electron enters in the atom of the given element, the elements are classified
as ‘s’ ‘p’, ‘d’ and ‘f’ block elements.
For example, sodium (Na) gets its new coming electron (differentiating
electron) into 3s level. Therefore ‘Na’ is an s-block element.
Aluminium (Al) gets its differentiating electron into ‘p’ subshell and it is
a p-block element. Scandium (Sc) gets its differentiating electron into
‘d’ subshell. Therefore it is a d-block element. Cerium (Ce) gets its newcoming electron into  ‘f’ subshell, hence,it is an f-block element.
Let us observe the electronic configurations of the following elements.
The last coming electron is underlined.
11Na   1s2 2s2 2p6 3s1
13Al    1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p1
21Sc   1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p6 4s2 3d1
58Ce  1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p6  3d10 4s2 4p6 4d10 5s2 5p6 6s2 4f1
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 186 X Class

Free distribution by A.P. Government 187Groups
The vertical columns in the periodic table are known as groups. There
are eighteen groups in long form of periodic table. They are represented
by using Roman numeral I through VIII with letters   A and B in traditional
notation.
According to latest recommendation of the IUPAC, these groups are
represented by Arabic numerals 1 through 18 with no A and B designations.
We use the latest system with the traditional heading following in
parenthesis.
Eg: Group 2 (II A); Group 16 (VI A)
Group of elements is also called element family  or chemical family .
For example Group 1 (IA) has from Li to Fr with outer shell electronic
configuration ns1 and is called Alkali metal  family.
Activity 2
Some main group elements of s-block and p-block have family names
as given in the following table.
Observe the long form of the periodic table and complete the table
with proper information.Z Elements n 1       2        3     4              5 6
l 0 0 10 1 2 01230 123 0
Sub 1s 2s 2p 3s 3p 3d 4s 4p 4d 4f 5s 5p 5d 5f 6s
Shell
11 Na 2 2 6 1
13 Al 2 2 6 2 1
21 Sc 2 2 6 2 6 12
58 Ce 2 2 6 2 6 10 2 6 10 12 61 2
Group
No.Name of the
element familyElements
From   ToValence
electronsValence
shell
configurationValency
1 (IA) Alkali metal family Li Fr ns111
2 (IIA) Alkali earth metal family
13 (IIIA) Boron family
14 (IV A) Carbon family
15 (VA) Nitrogen family
16 (VIA) Oxygen family or
(Chalcogen family)
17 (VIIA) Halogen family
18 (VIIIA) Noble gas family
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 188 X ClassPeriods
The horizontal rows in the periodic table are called periods. There are
seven periods in the modern periodic table. These periods are represented
by Arabic numerals 1 through 7.
1. The number of main shells present in the atom of particular element
decides to which period it belongs. For example, hydrogen (H) and
helium (He) atoms contain only one main shell (K). Therefore they
belongs to period-1. Similarly, the elements Li, Be, B, C, N, O, F andNe contain two main shells (K and L) in their atoms. Therefore theybelong to period-2.
2. The number of elements in period depend on how electrons are filled
into various shells. Each period starts with a new main shell ‘s’ subshell
and ends when the main shell is filled with respect to the ‘s’ and ‘p’
subshells (except the first period).
The first period starts with K-shell. The first main shell (K) contains
only one sub-shell, the (1s). For this subshell only two types of
electronic configurations are possible and they are 1s
1 (H) and 1s2
(He). Therefore, the first period contains only two elements.
3. Second period starts with the 2nd main shell (L). L-shell has two sub-
shells, namely, 2s and 2p. Eight types of configurations are possible in
this shell (L) like 2s1 and 2s2 and 2p1 to 2p6. Hence the second period
contains 8 elements Li, Be, B, C, N O, F and Ne in the order given.Thus, the 2
nd period consists two s-block elements (Li, Be) and six p-
block elements (B to Ne).
Do you know?
•Do you know how are the names of certain families of periodic table derived?
Alkali metal family:  aliquili = plantashes, Na, K etc.... were obtained from
plant ash, group IA elements are called alkali metals family.
Chalcogen family: chalcogenous = ore product, as the elements in group
16(VIA) form ores with metals. They are called as chalcogenous family.Halogen family: halos = sea salt, genus = produced. As most of the elemetns in
group 17(VIIA) are obtained from nature as sea salt. They are called as halogen
family.
Noble gases: as the elements of group 18(VIIIA) are chemically least active.
They are called as noble gases. There outer shell electronic configurations are
basis for octet rule.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 1894. Third period starts with third main shell (M). This shell (M) has 3 sub-
shells, namely, 3s, 3p and 3d, but while electrons are being filled into
the shell ‘3d’ gets electrons only after ‘4s’ is filled. Therefore, the 3rd
period contains again 8 elements, which includes two s-block elements
(Na, Mg) and six p-block elements (Al to Ar).
5. Fourth main shell (N). This shell (N) has four sub-shells namely 4s,
4p, 4d and 4f, but while electrons are being filled into the shell ,
electrons enter the atoms in the order 4s, 3d and 4p. Due to this, thefourth period contains 18 elements which includes two s-block (K,
Ca), 10 elements from d block (Sc to Zn) and six elements from p-
block (
31Ga to 36 Kr). There are altogether eighteen elements in the
fourth period.
On the same lines, we can explain why there are 18 elements in the
fifth period (37Rb to 54Xe).
There are thirty two elements in the Sixth period from 55Cs to 86 Rn
which includes 2 elements from s-block (6s) and 14 elements from
f-block (4f). 10 elements from d-block (5d) and 6 elements from p-block
(6p).
‘4f’ elements are called Lanthanoids  or lanthanides . Elements from
58Ce to 71Lu possess almost the same properties as 57 La. So, the name
lanthanoids is the most appropriate one for these elements.
7th period is incomplete and contains 2 elements from s-block (7s)
and 14 elements from f-block (5f), 10 elements from d-block (6d) and
some elements from p-block (7p). The 5f elements are called Actinoids
or as Actinides. They are from 90Th to 103Lr .
The f-block elements known as lanthanoids and actinoids are shown
separately at the bottom of the periodic table.
Do you know?
‘Ide’ means ‘heir’ and it is used generally for a change like C l to C l-. ‘Cl’ is
chlorine atom and Cl- is chloride ion. ‘ Oid’ means ‘the same’.
Some scientists suggest lanthanoids as 57La to 70Yb, some suggest them as
58Ce to 71Lu and some take 57La to 71Lu (15 elements). There is another argument
that even 21Sc and 39Y should be included in lanthanoids. All these suggestions have
substance because 21Sc, 39Y and 57La to 71Lu all have the similar outer shells
configurations.
Also in the case of actinoids. There are different arguments like actinoids are
from 90Th to 103Lr or 89Ac to 102No or 89Ac to 103Lr.
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 190 X ClassMetals and Non metals
You have learnt about the properties of metals in the chapter Metals
and Non Metals in class VIII. Let us study the metallic properties elements
in periodic table.
The elements with three or less electrons in the outer shell are
considered to be metals and those with five or more electrons in the outer
shell are considered to be non metals. We may find some exceptions to
this.  ‘d’ block elements (3rd group to 12th group) are metals and they are
also known as transition metals and the metallic character of d-block
elements decreases gradually from left to right in periodic table.
Lanthanoids and actinoids actually belong to 3rd group (III B) which is within
the transition elements: hence they are called the inner transition elements.
Metalloids or semi-metals are elements which have properties that
are intermediate between the properties of metals and non metals. Theypossess properties like metals but brittle like non metals. They are generally
semi conductors. Eg: B, Si, Ge.
All elements in s-block are metals, whereas in p-block (except 18
th
group) there are metals, non metals and metalloids. In periodic table you
will notice a staircase like demarcation. The elements to the left of this
demarcation are metals and to the right are non-metals. The elements on
staircase (or) very near to it like B, Si, As, Ge etc., are metalloids.
Periodic properties of the elements in the modern table
The modern periodic table is organized on the basis of the electronic
configuration of the atoms of elements. Physical and chemical propertiesof elements are related to their electronic configurations particularly theouter shell configurations. The atoms of the elements in a group possess
similar electronic configurations. Therefore, we expect all the elements
in a group should have similar chemical properties and there should be a
regular gradation in their physical properties from top to bottom.
Similarly, across the table, i.e., from left to right in any period elements
get an increase in the atomic number by one unit between any two successive
Think and discuss
•Why lanthanoids and actinoids placed separately at the bottom of the
periodic table?
•If they are inserted within the table imagine how the table would be?
Free distribution by A.P. Government 191elements. Therefore, the electronic configuration of valence shell of any
two elements in a given period is not same. Due to this reason elements
along a period possess different chemical properties with regular gradation
in their physical properties from left to right. To understand this we will
take some properties of elements and discuss how they vary in groups and
in periods.
Properties of elements and their trends in Groups and in Periods
1. Valence:  Valence (or) valency of an element was defined as the
combining power of an element with respect to hydrogen, oxygen or
indirectly any other element through hydrogen and oxygen.
Valence of an element with respect to hydrogen is the number of
hydrogen atoms with which one atom of that element chemically combines.
Valence of an element with respect to oxygen is twice the number of
oxygen atoms with which one atom of that element combines.
For example one atom of ‘Na’ chemically combines with one atom of
‘H’ to give NaH. Therefore, the valence of Na is 1. One atom of ‘Ca’combines with one atom of ‘O’ to give CaO. So the valency of Ca is 2.
In general, the valence of an element with respect to hydrogen is its
traditional group number. If the element is in the group V or above, its
valence is 8– group number . For example, chlorine valence is 8-7 = 1.
In general, each period starts with valency 1 for 1
st group elements,
increases upto 4 with respect to the group number and then decreases
from 4 to 3 to 2 to 1 to zero in the following groups (this is applicable
only for main group elements i.e., ‘s’ and ‘p’ block elements.
Now a days the valence of an elment is generally taken as the number
of valence shell (outer most shell) electrons in its atom. Oxidation number
concept almost is the latest subsititute to the valence concept in the modern
literatura.
Activity  3
•Find out the valencies of first 20 elements.
•How does the valency vary in a period on going from left to right?
•How does the valency vary on going down a group?
Atomic radius
Atomic radius of an element may be difined as the distance from the
centre of the nucleus of the atom to its outermost shell.
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 192 X ClassAtomic radius of an element is not possible to measure in its isolated
state. This is because it is not possible to determine the location of the
electron that surrounds the nucleus. However, we can measure the distance
between the nuclei of adjacent atoms in a solid. From this we can estimate
the size of the atom by assigning half of this distance to the radius of eachatom. This method is best suited to elements such as the metals that exist
in the solid state. More than 75 percent of the elements are metals andatomic radii of metals are called metallic radii . Another way of estimating
the size of an atom is to measure the distance between the two atoms incovalent molecules. The size of a chlorine atom is estimated by measuringthe length of the covalent bond between two chlorine atoms in a C l
2
molecule. Half of this distance is taken as atomic radius  which is called
as the covalent radius  of chlorine atom.
Atomic radius is measured in ‘pm’ (pico meter) units.
1 pm = 10-12m
Variation of atomic radii in group
Atomic radii increase from top to bottom in a group (column) of the
periodic table. As we go down in a group, the atomic number of the element
increases. Therefore to accommodate more number of electrons, more
shells are required. As a result the distance between the nucleus and the
outer shell of the atom increases as we go down the group in spite ofincrease in nuclear change.
Variation of atomic radii in period
Atomic radii of elements decrease across a period from left to right.
As we go to right, electrons enter into the same main shell or even innershell in case of ‘d’ block and ‘f’ block elements. Therefore, there shouldbe no  change in distance between nucleus and outer shell but nuclear charge
increases because of the increase in the atomic number of elements in
period. Hence, the nuclear attraction on the outer shell electrons increases.As a result the size of the atom decreases.Group Element (atomic radius in pm)
Group1: Li (152), Na (186), K (231), Rb (244) and Cs (262)
Group 17: F (64), C l (99), Br (114), I (133) and At (140)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 193•Do the atom of an element and its ion have same size?
Let us consider the following situation.
Assume that sodium (Na) atom has lost an electron and formed a cation
of sodium (Na+).
Which one between Na and Na+ would have more size? Why?
Atomic number of sodium (Na) is 11. Therefore sodium (Na) atom
contains 11 protons and 11 electrons with outer electron as 3s1. On the
other hand Na+ ion has 11 protons but only 10 electrons. The 3s shell of
Na+ level has no electron in it. Hence its outer shell configuration is
2s2 2p6. As proton number is more than electrons in it, the nucleus of Na+
ion attracts outer shell electrons with strong nuclear force. As a result the
Na+ ion shrinks in size. Therefore, the size of Na+ ion is less than ‘Na’
atom. In general the positive ion (cation) of an element has less size than
its neutral atom.
Consider another example:   Assume that chlorine (C l) atom has
gained an electron to form anion of chlorine (C l–) i.e. chloride ion.
•Which one, between C l and C l– would have more size? Why?
Electronic configuration of chlorine (C l) atom is 1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p5
and the electronic configuration of chloride (C l–) ion is 1s2 2s2 2p6
3s2 3p6. Both chlorine and chloride ion have 17 protons each but there are
17 electrons in chlorine atom, where as 18 electrons in chloride ion.
Therefore, the nuclear attraction is less in C l– ion when compared with
chlorine atom.  Therefore the size of the chlorine (C l) atom is less size
than C l- ion. In general negative ion (anion) of an element has bigger size
than its neutral atom.
•Which one in each of the following pairs is larger in size?
(a) Na, Al  (b) Na, Mg+2  (c) S2-, Cl–  (d) Fe2+, Fe3+  (e) C4-, F–
Ionization Energy
The energy required to remove an electron from the outer most orbit
or shell of a neutral gaseous atom is called ionization energy. The energy
required to remove the first electron from the outer most orbit or shell ofPeriod Element (atomic radius in pm)
2nd period Li (152), Be (111), B (88), C (77), N (74), O (66), F (64)
3rd period Na (186), Mg (160), Al (143), Si (117), P(110), S(104), C l(99)
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 194 X Classa neutral gaseous atom of the element is called its first ionization energy.
The energy required to remove the an electron from uni- positive ion ofthe element is called the 2
nd ionization energy of that element and so on.
M(g) + IE1  J  M+
(g) + e-(IE1= first ionization energy)
M+
(g) + IE2  J M+2
(g) + e-(IE2= second ionization energy)
Ionization energy of an element depends on its
1.  Nuclear charge: more the nuclear charge more is the ionization
energy. eg:Between 11Na and 17Cl, Chlorine atom has more ionization energy.
2. Screening effect or sheilding effect: more the shells with
electrons between the nucleus and the valence shell, they act as screens
and decrease nuclear attraction over valence electron. This is called the
screening effect. More the screening effect, less is the ionization energy.
Between 3Li and 55Cs, the element 55Cs with more inner shells has less
ionization energy.
3.  Penetration power of the orbitals: orbitals belonging to the same
main shell have diffrent piercing power towards the nucleus, for examle
4s>4p>4d>4f> in the penetration. There fore, it is easier to remove 4felectron than 4s. Between 
4Be 1s2 2s2 and B 1s2 2s2 2p1, the element B has
less ionization energy due  to less penetration power of ‘2p’ compared to‘2s’
4. Stable configuration: it is easier to remove one electron from 
8O
(1s22s22p4) than 7N (1s22s22p3). This is because, 7N has stable half filled
configuration.
5.  Atomic radius: more the atomic radius, less is the ionization energy.
Therefore, ionization energy of ‘F’ is greater than that of ‘I’ and theionization energy of ‘Na’ is more than that of ‘Cs’.
Ionization energy decreases as we go down in a group and generally
increases from left to right in a period.
Ionization energy is expressed in kJ mol
-1
Think and discuss
•Second ionization energy of an element is higher than its first ionization
energy. why?
Free distribution by A.P. Government 195Ionization energy is also called the ionization potential but when we use
the term the ionization potential, it is better to write the unit eV atom–1.
Electron affinity
Atoms of some elements gain electrons while forming ionic
compounds. An atom is able to gain an electron only when the electron
outside the atom is attracted by its nucleus. Attraction involves the
liberation of energy.
The electron affinity of an element is defined as the energy liberated
when an electron is added to its neutral gaseous atom. Electron affinity of
an element is also called electron gain enthalpy of that element.
M(g) + e- J M-
(g) + EA (EA = Electron affinity)
The energy liberated when an electron is added to a uni-negative ion
of the element is called the 2nd electron affinity of that element. However,
practically no element shows liberation of energy when the 2nd electron is
added to its uni-negative ion. It does not mean that di-negative or   tri-
negative ions do not form. They do form, but for adding 2nd electron, energy
in another way  like bond formation must be given.
Electron gain enthalpy values decrease as we go down in a group, but
increase along a period from left to right. Metals have very low electron
gain enthalpy values and alkaline earth metals have even positive values.Note that the negative sign for energy value in table indicates that energyis liberated or lost, and the positive sign tells that the energy is gained orabsorbed. All the factors which influence the ionization energy would also
influence the electron gain enthalpy.Electron affinity values of halogens are (in kJ mol-1); F(-328); Cl(-349);
Br (-325); I(-295) kJ mol-1 . Similarly for group 16 elements, the electron gain
enthalpies are O(-141); S(-200); Ge(-195) and Te(-190) kJ mol-1.
Think and discuss
•The calculated electron gain enthalpy values for alkaline earth metals and
noble gases are positive. How can you explain this?
•The second period element for example ‘F’ has less electron gain enthalpy
than the third period element of the same group for example ‘C l’. Why?
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 196 X ClassElectronegativity
The ionization energy and the electron gain enthalpy are properties of
isolated atoms of elements. There has been a need to have a comparative
scale relating the abilities of elements to attract electrons when their atoms
are combined. For this purpose, the concept of electronegativity is
introduced.
The electronegativity of an element is defined as the relative tendency
of its atom to attract electrons towards it self when it is bonded to the
atom of another element.
All the factors that influence the ionization energy and the electron
affinity of elements influence the electronegativity values of those
elements. Because of this, Milliken proposed that the electronegativity ofan element is the average value of its ionization energy and electron affinity.
Electronegativity =     ionization energy + electron affinity
            2
Pauling assigned the electronegativity values for elements on the basis
of bond energies. He assumed that the electronegativity of hydrogen is2.20 and calculated the values of other elements with respect to hydrogen.
Observe the values in the following example
Electronegativity values of elements decrease as we go down in a group
and increase along a period from left to right. The most electronegative
element is ‘F’ and the least electronegative stable element is ‘Cs’.
Metallic and Non-Metallic Properties
Metals generally show less electronegative character. In compounds,
they generally show a tendency to remain as positive ions. This property is
often termed as electropositive character. Metals are electropositive
elements.
Non metals are generally more electronegative due to their smaller
atomic radii.
Let us examine the elements of 3rd period.
3rd period: Na Mg Al Si P S C lHalogens: F(4.0), C l(3.0), Br(2.8), I(2.5)
2nd period: Li(1.0), Be(1.47), B(2.0), C(2.5), N(3.0), O(3.5), F(4.0), Ne(-)Period           Element (electronegativity with respect hydrogen)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 197•Elements are classified on the basis of similarities in their Properties.
•Dobereiner grouped the elements into Triads and Newlands gave the law of Octaves.
•Mendeleeff’s Periodic law: The physical and chemical Properties of the elements are the periodic
functions of their Atomic Masses.
•Moseley’s  Periodic law : The physical and chemical properties of the elements are the periodic
functions of their Atomic numbers.
•Modern Periodic Law: The Physical and chemical Properties of the elements are the periodicfunctions of their Electronic Configurations.
•Anomalies in arrangement of elements based on increasing atomic mass could be removed
when the elements were arranged in order of increasing atomic number, a fundamental property
of the element discovered by Moseley.
•Elements in the Modern Periodic table are arranged in 18 groups and 7 periods.
•Elements are classified into s, p, d, f blocks, depending upon to which sub shell the differentiating
electron enters in the atom of the given element.
•All the d- block elements (except Zn group) are known as transition elements and all the
f-block elements (both Lanthanides, Actinides) are known as inner transition elements.
•Periodic properties of elements and their trends in groups and in periodsKey words
Triad, Octave, Periodic Law, Periodic table, period, group, Lanthanides,
Actinides, Element  family, Metalloids, Periodicity, Atomic radius, Ionization
energy, Electron affinity, Electronegativity, Electropositivity
What we have learnt
We know that Na and Mg are metals, Al and Si are semi metals
(metalloids), P, S and C l are non metals. So we find metals on left side and
non metals on right side of the periodic table. This means metallic character
decreases while non metallic character increases as we move along a period
(from left to right).
Let us take group 14 (IV A) elements.
IV A group: C Si Ge Sn Pb
Here also we know that carbon is nonmetal. Si and Ge are metalloids.
Sn and Pb are metals.
So we find nonmetals  particularly at the right hand side  top and metals
at the left and right hand side  bottom of the periodic table. This means
metallic character increases while non metallic character decreases in a
group as we move from top to bottom.
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 198 X ClassImprove your learning
Periodic property Trend in
groups periods
From  top to bottom From left to right
Valency
Atomic radius Increasing Decreasing
Ionisation energy Decreasing Increasing
Electron affinity Decreasing Increasing
Electronegativity Decreasing Increasing
Electropositivity Increasing Decreasing
Metallic nature Increasing Decreasing
Non-Metallic nature Decreasing Increasing
1. Newlands proposed the law of octaves. Mendeleeff suggested eight groups for elements in his
table. How do you explain these observations in terms of modern periodic classification?(AS1)
2. What are the limitations of Mendeleeff’s periodic table? How could the modern periodic table
overcome the limitations of Mendeleeff’s table? (AS1)
3. Define the modern periodic Law. Discuss the construction of the long form of the periodic table.
(AS1)
4. Explain how the elements are classified into s, p, d and f- block elements in the periodic table
and give the advantage of this kind of classification.  (AS1)
5. Given below is the electronic configuration of elements A, B, C, D. (AS1)
A.1s2  2s21. Which are the elements coming with in the same period
B. 1s2 2s2 2p6 3s22. Which are the ones coming with in the same group?
C.1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p33. Which are the noble gas elements?
D.1s2 2s2 2p64. To which group and period does the elements ‘C ‘belong
6. Write down the characteristics of the elements having atomic number 17.  (AS1)
Electronic configuration ____________________________________
Period number ____________________________________
Group number ____________________________________
Element family ____________________________________
No. of valence electrons ____________________________________
Valency ____________________________________
Metal or non-metal ____________________________________
7. a.  State the number of valence electrons, the group number and the period number of each
element given in the following table:   (AS1)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 199b.State whether the following elements belong to a Group (G), Period (P) or Neither Group nor
Period (N).   (AS1)
8. Elements in a group generally possess similar properties, but elements along a period have
different properties. How do you explain this statement?  (AS1)
9. s - block and p - block elements except 18th group elements are sometimes called as
‘Representative elements’ based on their abundant availability in the nature. Is it justified? Why?
(AS1)
10. Complete the following table using the periodic table.  (AS1)Element Valence electrons Group number Period number
Sulphur
OxygenMagnesium
Hydrogen
FluorineAluminum
Elements G/P/N
Li,C,O
Mg, Ca, BaBr, Cl, F
C,S, Br
Al, Si, C l
Li, Na, k
C,N,OK, Ca, Br.
Period
numberFilling up orbital’s
(sub shells)Maximum number of
electrons, filled in all
the sub shellsTotal no. of
elements in the
period
1
23
4 4s, 3d, 4p 18 18
56
7 7s, 5f, 6d, 7p 32 incomplete
Classification of Elements - The Periodic Table 200 X Class11. Complete the following table using the periodic table.  (AS1)
12. The electronic configuration of the elements X, Y and Z are given below?
a) X = 2 b) Y = 2, 6 c) Z = 2, 8, 2
i) Which element belongs to second period? ii) Which element belongs to second group?
iii)Which element belongs to 18th group?
13. Identify the element that has the larger atomic radius in each pair of the following and mark it
with a symbol ( 3). (AS1)
(i) Mg or Ca (ii) Li or Cs (iii) N or P (iv) B or Al
14. Identify the element that has the lower Ionization energy in each pair of the following and mark
it with a symbol ( 3).  (AS1)
(i) Mg or Na (ii) Li or O (iii) Br or F (iv) K or Br
15. In period 2, element X is to the right of element Y . Then, find which of the elements have:
(i) Low nuclear charge (ii) Low atomic size (iii) High ionization energy
(iv)High electronegativity (v) More metallic character                                                  (AS1)
16. How does metallic character change when we move
i. Down a group ii. Across a period?
17. Why was the basis of classification of elements changed from the atomic mass to the atomic
number?  (AS1)
18. What is a periodic property? How do the following properties change in a group and period?
Explain. (AS1)
(a) Atomic radius   (b) Ionization energy     (c) Electron affinity    (d) Electronegativity.
(b) Explain the ionization energy order in the following sets of elements:
a) Na, Al, C l  b) Li, Be, B c) C, N, O   d) F, Ne, Na    e) Be, Mg, Ca. (AS1)
19. Name two elements that you would expect to have chemical properties similar to Mg. What is
the basis for your choice? (AS2)
20. On the basis of atomic numbers predict to which block the elements with atomic number    9,
37, 46 and 64 belongs to? (AS2)
21. Using the periodic table, predict the formula of compound formed between and element X of
group 13 and another element Y of group 16.  (AS2)Period
numberTotal no. of
elementsElementsTotal no. of elements in
From To s-block p-block d-block f-block
1
23
4
56
7
Free distribution by A.P. Government 201Fill in the blanks
Multiple choice questions22. An element X belongs to 3rd period and group 2 of the periodic table. State
(a) The no. of valence electrons (b) The valency (c) Whether it is metal or a nonmetal.  (AS2)
23. An element has atomic number 19. Where would you expect this element in the periodic table
and why?  (AS2)
24. Aluminium does not react with water at room temperature but reacts with both dil. HC l and
NaOH solutions. Verify these statements experimentally. Write your observations with chemical
equations. From these observations, can we conclude that A l is a metalloid?  (AS3)
25. Collect the information about reactivity of VIII A group elements (noble gases) from internet or
from your school library and prepare a report on their special character when compared toother elements of periodic table.  (AS4)
26. Collect information regarding metallic character of elements of IA group and prepare report to
support the idea of metallic character increases in a group as we move from top to bottom.(AS4)
27. How do you appreciate the role of electronic configuration of the atoms of elements in periodic
classification?  (AS6)
28. Without knowing the electronic configurations of the atoms of elements Mendeleev still could
arrange the elements nearly close to the arrangements in the Modern periodic table. How canyou appreciate this? (AS 6)
29. Comment on the position of hydrogen in periodic table.  (AS7)30. How the positions of elements in the periodic table help you to predict its chemical properties?
Explain with an example.  (AS7)
1. Lithium, _____________ and potassium constitute a Dobereiner’s triad.
2. _______ was the basis of the classifications proposed by Dobereiner, Newlands and Mendeleeff.
3. Noble gases belongs to _______________ group of periodic table.
4. The incomplete period of the periodic table is _____________ .5. The element at the bottom of a group would be expected to show __________ metallic character
than the element at the top.
1. Number of elements present in period – 2 of the long form of periodic table [ ]
a)  2 b)  8 c)  18 d)  32
2. Nitrogen (Z = 7) is the element of group V of the periodic table. Which of the  following is the
atomic number of the next element in the group? [ ]
a)  9 b)  14 c)  15 d)  17
3. Electron configuration of an atom is 2, 8, 7 to which of the following elements would it be
chemically similar? [ ]a) nitrogen(Z=7) b) fluorine(Z=9) c) phosphorous(Z=15) d) argon(Z=18)
4. Which of the following is the most active metal? [ ]
a) lithium b) sodium c) potassium d) rubidium
Chemical Bonding 202 X ClassYou have learnt about electron configuration of elements and periodic
table in previous lessons. It was learnt that there are over 115 elements.
•How do they usually exist?
•Do they exist as a single atom or as a group of atoms?In Class IX, we saw that several elements like oxygen, nitrogen and
hydrogen exist as diatomic molecules. What is the force that is holding
these constituent atoms together in molecules?
•Are there elements which exist as atoms?
•Why do some elements exist as molecules and some as atoms?In lower classes you have also learnt about the different laws of
chemical combinations. Since the formation of chemical compounds takes
place as a result of combination of atoms of various elements in differentways, it raises many questions.
•Why do some elements and compounds react vigorously while others
are inert?
•Why is the chemical formula for water H
2O and for sodium chloride
NaCl, why not HO2 and NaC l2?
•Why do some atoms combine while others do not?
We will try to answer such questions in this chapter.
•Are elements and compounds simply made up of separate atoms
individually arranged?
•Is there any attraction between atoms?
Let us take the example of common salt, NaC l. When you shake salt
from a shaker does it separate into sodium and chlorine? No! This shows
that the sodium and chlorine atoms are being held together.
•What is that holding them together?Chemical Bonding10Chapter

Free distribution by A.P. Government 203By the late 19th century and early twentieth century, scientists knew
about three types of forces – gravitational, magnetic and electrostatic.
They also knew about the existence of electrons and protons. So it wasbelieved that electrostatic forces were the cause of attraction between
atoms in a molecule. When two atoms come sufficiently close together,
the electrons of each atom experience the attractive force of the nucleus
of the other atom. But the electrons which are negatively charged and repel
each other, and the positively charged nuclei also repel each other. The
strength of attraction or repulsion will decide bond formation. If attractionis more than the repulsion then atoms combine. If repulsion is more than
attraction then the atoms do not combine. The nucleus and the electrons
in the inner shell remain unaffected when atoms come close together. Butthe electrons in the outermost shell (valence shell) of atoms get affected.
It was seen that the metal part of the compound
migrated towards the negative electrode and the
non-metal part towards the positive electrode. Soit was proposed that metals are responsible forpositively charged particles and non-metals areresponsible for negatively charged particles. Theoppositely charged particles are held together byelectrostatic forces in a compound. Do you agree with this explanation? Why?While this explanation could explain bonding in NaC
l, KCl etc. it could not explain
bonding in carbon compounds or diatomic molecules of elements.
A Votaic pileDavy’s experiment –
Humphry Davy (1778-1819),
a professor of chemistry at theRoyal Institution in London,constructed a battery of over 250metallic plates. In 1807, usingelectricity from this battery, hewas able to extract highly reactivemetals like potassium and sodiumby electrolysis of fused salts.
Experimental set up by Davy
Do you know?
Chemical Bonding 204 X ClassElectrons in valence shell (valence electrons) are responsible for the
formation of bonds between atoms.
In previous lessons you studied about exothermic and endothermic
reactions. You also studied about reactivity of elements in periodic table.
Some elements are more reactive and some are less reactive;
•Why there is absorption of energy in certain chemical reactions and
release of energy in other reactions?
•Where the absorbed energy goes?
•Is there any relation to energy and bond formation between atoms?
•What could be the reason for the change in reactivity of elements?
Lewis symbols ( or) Lewis dot structures:
Periodic Classification and arrangement of elements in the periodic
table according to the electron configuration gave a new thought about
chemical bond.
The discovery of noble gases and the understanding of their electronic
configurations helped us in explaining the formation of chemical bonds
among the atoms of the elements. Noble gases which belong to zero group(18
th group or VIII A) are typical gases with almost negligible chemical
activity when compared to other elements. They undergo few or no chemical
changes. They are more stable and do not form molecules by allowingtheir atoms to combine among themselves or with the atoms of other
elements.
•What could be the reason for this?
Let us investigate.
Consult the periodic table given in the previous chapter and fill the
following table:
Table-1
Look at the second column and third column. It is clear that all the
noble gases have eight electrons in the outermost shell, except
Helium (He).Element Z Electronic configuration Valence elctrons
KL M N
Helium (He) 2 2 2
Neon (Ne) 10 2 8 8
Argon(Ar) 18 2 8 8 8
Krypton(Kr) 36 2 8 18 8 8
Free distribution by A.P. Government 205The arrangement of electrons in different shells of atoms (electronic
configuration) of 18th group elements is shown in the table-1. The valence
electrons in the atom of an element is depicted in a short form by Lewis
symbol  or electron dot structure . We represent the nucleus and inner shell
electrons of the atom by the symbol of the element and electrons in the
outer shell by dots or cross marks.
Let us see how? Lewis dot structure of argon  and sodium atoms are
written.
Let us start with argon . Its atom has eight valence electrons.
First write the symbol of element argon .      Ar
Place the valence electrons around the symbol. Put two dots at a time
on each of the four sides of the symbol of the element till all are used up.
So, we get,
Similarly, for sodium, the number of valence electrons in sodium is
one and the symbol is Na. We can also use cross mark for the electrons.
The Lewis structure for sodium atom is therefore:
The Lewis dot structures of the atoms of noble gases are shown below:
Activity  1
Write the Lewis structures of the given elements in the table. Also
consult the periodic table and fill in the group number of the element.
Table – 2:: Ar :::
Nax
He:: Kr :::: Ne :::
: Xe :::: Ar :::: Rn :::
Element Hydrogen Helium Beryllium  Boron Carbon Nitrogen oxygen
Group 1
number
Valence 1
electron
Lewis dot H .
structure
Chemical Bonding 206 X ClassLook at the periodic table. Do you see any relation between the number
of valence electrons and group numbers? We find that for groups 1-2 and
13 –18, we can use the periodic table to find the number of valence
electrons. Group1 has one outer electron, group 2 has two, and group 13
has three and so on.
•What did you notice in Lewis dot structure of noble gases and
electronic configurations of the atoms of these elements shown intable - 1.
It was found that the elements which participate in chemical reactions
get octet or ns
2 np6 configuration similar to that of noble gas elements. It
is to be noted that octet rule is still a rule not the law, because there are
considerable exceptions for this rule.
Electronic theory of valence by Lewis and Kossel
There were number of attempts to explain the chemical bond formation
between atoms in terms of electrons but a satisfactory explanation forthis concept was given by Kossel and Lewis in 1916. They gave this concept
independently. The basis for their theory was valence in terms of electrons.
They provided logical explanation of valence on the basis of the lack ofchemical activity of noble gases which led to the proposal of octet rule.
Observe the practical behaviour of atoms of main group elements
(Group IA, IIA, IIIA, IV A, V A, VIA, VIIA and zero or VIIIA group elements).
When they are allowed to undergo chemical changes, they try to get octetelectronic configuration in the outer shells.
Let us understand this with the following illustrations.
Group IA elements (Li to Cs) try to lose one valence shell electron
from their atoms to form corresponding uni-positive ions which get octet
in their outer shells.
Example: 
11Na J 2, 8, 1 ;    11Na+ J 2, 8
Group IIA elements (Mg to Ba) try to lose two valence electrons from
their atoms during chemical changes and form di– positive ions with the
octet in the outer shells.
Example: 12Mg J 2, 8, 2 ;    12Mg2+ J 2, 8
Group IIIA elements try to lose three valence electrons from their
atoms and form corresponding tri positive ions with octates in the outershells.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 207Example: 13Al J 2, 8, 3 ;    13Al3+ J 2, 8
Group VIA elements try to gain two electrons into the valence shells
of their atoms during the chemical changes and form corresponding di
negative anions which get octet in their outer shells.
Example: 8O J 2, 6 ;    8O2– J 2, 8
Group VIIA elements try to gain one electron into the valence shells
of their atoms during the chemical changes and form corresponding
uni– anions which get octet in their outer shells.
Example: 9F J 2, 7 ;    9F– J 2, 8
Group VIIIA elements, the noble gases do not try to lose or gain
electrons. Generally, helium and neon do not participate in chemical
changes. Even other elements of VIIIA do not gain or lose electrons from
their atoms when they participate in a very few chemical changes.
Example: 10Ne J 2, 8 ;    No electron gain or loss from the neon
atom.
•What have you observed from the above conclusions about the main
groups?
•Why do atoms of elements try to combine and form molecules?
Noble gases of VIII A possess eight electrons in the valence shells of
their atoms. Helium is an exception. Its atom has only two electrons, but
its only shell is completely filled. Noble gases with eight electrons in thevalence shell in their atoms are highly stable and rarely participate in
chemical changes. Therefore it is concluded that any species (atom or
ion) with eight electrons in the valence shell is stable.V VI VII
NOF
PSC l
As Se BrSb Te I
Bi Po AtI II III
Na Mg AlKC a G a
Rb Sr InCs Ba Tl
Fr RaVIII
Ne
Ar
Kr
Xe
Ra–3 –2 –1Magic
octetLose Electrons Gain Electrons
+1 +2 +3
Non metals Noble gases MetalsNet charge on
the species}
Chemical Bonding 208 X Class•Is it accidental that IA to VIIA main group elements during chemical
reactions get eight electrons in the outermost shells of their ions,
similar to noble gas atoms?
No. It cannot be simply accidental. Eight electrons in the outermost
shell definitely gives stability to the ion or atom. Based on the above
observations a statement known as “ The Octet Rule” is framed.
Octet rule:
It may be stated as “The atoms of elements tend to undergo chemical
changes that help to leave their atoms with eight outer-shell electrons.”
Lewis depicted the atom in terms of a positively charged kernel (Kernel
is the nucleus and all other electrons in the atom except the outer mostshell electrons) and the outershell that could accommodate a maximum
of eight electrons.
Chemically active elements do not have an octet of electrons in the
valence shell of their atoms. Their reactivity arises from their tendency to
achieve the octet, by forming bonds either with atoms of their own type orwith atoms of other elements.
The force of attraction between any two atoms or a group of atoms
that results a stable entity is called a ‘chemical bond’. There are many
types of chemical bonds, but here we discuss only about ionic bond and
covalent bond.
Ionic and Covalent bonds with Lewis dot formulae
A.  Ionic bond
Kossel proposed the ionic bond (electrostatic bond) based on the
following facts.
i. Ionic bond is formed between atoms of two dissimilar elements due
to transfer of electrons from the atom of one element to the other.
ii. There are highly reactive metals like alkali metals (IA) and highly
reactive non-metals like halogens (VIIA) on the left side and right side
of the periodic table respectively.
iii. Noble gases except helium have eight electrons in the valence shells
of their atoms. They are chemically inactive and stable.
iv. To attain eight electrons in the outermost shell similar to noble gases
metal atoms that have one two or three electrons in the valence shells
generally lose those electrons and form stable positive ions calledcations .
Free distribution by A.P. Government 209
Do you know?
The number of electrons gained by a non-metal element for its atom is its valency,
which is equal to (8 -  its group number).
Ex. The valency of chlorine is (8 – 7) = 1.Example:11Na  2, 8, 1   ;   Na+    2, 8
12Mg  2, 8, 2  ;   Mg2+  2, 8
13Al   2, 8, 3   ;   Al3+   2, 8
v . To attain eight electrons in the outermost shell, non-metal atoms that
have 5,6 or 7 valence electrons gain 3,2 or 1 electron respectively and
form negative ions known as anions.
Example:15P    2, 8, 5   ;   P3-    2, 8, 8
16S    2, 8, 6   ;   S2-     2, 8, 8
17Cl  2, 8, 7   ;   C l-     2, 8, 8
vi. Formation of ionic bond
The positive ions (cations) and negative ions (anions) that are formed
due to the transfer of electrons from the metal atoms to the non-metal
atoms experience the electrostatic forces and get attracted to form
chemical bond. As this bond is between charged particles known as
ions, it is called ionic bond . Sometimes based on the forces being
electrostatic, the bond is also called the electrostatic bond.  As the
valence concept has been explained in terms of electrons, it is alsocalled the electrovalent bond .
Thus, we can define ionic bond as follows:
The electrostatic attractive force that keeps cation and anion (which
are formed from metal atoms and  non-metal atoms due to transfer of
electrons) together to form a new electrically neutral compounds is called
‘ionic bond’ .
•Explain the formation of ionic compounds NaC l, MgC l
2, Na2O and
AlF3 through Lewis electron dot symbols (formulae)
Do you know?
The number of electrons lost from a metal atom is the valence of its element
which is equal to its group number.
Ex. Na and Mg have valence 1 and 2 respectively.
Chemical Bonding 210 X ClassEg-1.  Formation of sodium chloride (NaC l):
Sodium chloride is formed from the elements sodium and chlorine. It
can be explained as follows:
Na(s) + 1/2 C l2(g)  J     NaC l(s)
Cation formation
When sodium (Na) atom loses one electron to get octet electron
configuration it forms a cation (Na+) and gets electron configuration that
of Neon (Ne) atom.
11Na (g)     J     11Na+ (g)  +  e-
E.C. 2, 8, 1     2, 8
or    [Ne] 3s1    [Ne]
Anion formation
Chlorine has shortage of one electron to get octet in its valence shell.
So it gains the electron from Na atom to form anion and gets electron
configuration as that of argon (Ar).
          17Cl (g)      +    e-   J Cl– (g)
Electronic configuration 2, 8, 7           2, 8, 8
    or    [Ne] 3s2 3p5[Ne] 3s2 3p6  or [Ar]
Formation of the compound NaC l from its ions:
Transfer of electrons between ‘Na’ and ‘C l’ atoms, results in the
formation of ‘Na+’ and ‘C l–’ ions. These oppositely charged ions get
attracted towards each other due to electrostatic forces and form thecompound sodium chloride (NaC l).
Na
+
(g)   +   Cl–
(g)    J   Na+Cl– (s)  or NaC l
Eg-2.  Formation of magnesium chloride (MgC l2):
Magnesium chloride is formed from the elements magnesium and
chlorine. The bond formation MgC l2 in brief using chemical equation is as
follows:
Mg(s) + Cl2(g)J Mg C l2(s)
Cation formation
     11Mg (g)    J     11Mg2+ (g)  +  2e–
Electronic configuration   2, 8, 2                  2, 8
or       [Ne] 3s2        [Ne]
Anion formation
   2Cl (g)      +   2e–   J   2Cl– (g)
Electronic configuration   2, 8, 7               2, 8, 8
or    [Ne] 3s2 3p5            [Ne] 3s2 3p6  or [Ar]
Free distribution by A.P. Government 211The compound MgC l2 formation from its ions:
Mg2+ gets ‘Ne’ configuration and
Each C l– gets ‘Ar’ configuration
Mg2+ (g)   +   2C l–
(g)    J   MgC l2 (s)
One ‘Mg’ atom transfers two electrons one each to two ‘C l’ atoms and
so formed Mg2+ and 2C l– attract to form MgC l2.
Eg-3.  Formation of di sodium monoxide(Na2O):
Di sodium monoxide formation can be explained as follows:
Cation formation (Na+ formation):
   2Na (g)    J     2Na+ (g)  +  2e-
Electronic configuration   2, 8, 1    2, 8
or          [Ne] 3s1  [Ne]
Anion formation (O2–, the oxide formation):
    O (g)      +      2e-   J   O2- (g)
Electronic configuration    2, 6    2, 8
or    [Ne] 2s2 2p4               [He] 2s2 2p6  or [Ne]
The compound Na2O formation from its ions is as shown.
2Na+ (g)   +   O2-
(g)    J   Na2O(s)
Two ‘Na’ atoms transfer one electron each to one oxygen atom to
form 2Na+ and O2-
Each Na+ gets ‘Ne’ configuration and O2- gets ‘Ne’ configuration.
These ions (2Na+ and O2-) attract to form Na2O.
Eg-4.  Formation of aluminium chloride (AlC l3):
Aluminium chloride formation can be explained as follows:
Formation of aluminium ion (Al3+), the cation:
     13Al(g)    J      Al3+ (g)  +  3e-
Electronic configuration   2, 8, 3        2, 8
or        [Ne] 3s23p1       [Ne]
Formation of chloride ion (C l-), the anion:
   3Cl(g)     +      3e-   J   3Cl–
(g)
Electronic configuration 2, 8, 7                2, 8,8
or    [Ne] 3s2 3p5               [Ne] 3s2 3p6  or [Ar]
Each aluminium atom loses three electrons and three chlorine atoms
gain them, one electron each.
Chemical Bonding 212 X Class
The compound AlC l3 is formed from its component ions by the
electrostatic forces of attractions.
Al3+ (g)   +   3C l–
(g)    J   AlC l3 (s)
The arrangement of ions in ionic comounds
•How do cations and anions of an ionic compound exist in its solid
state?
•Let us explain this with sodium chloride as our example:
•Do you think that pairs of Na+ Cl- as units would be present in the solid
crystal?
If you think so, it is not correct. Remember that electrostatic forces
are non directional. Therefore, it is not possible for one Na+ to be attracted
by one C l– and vice-versa. Depending upon the size and charge of a particular
ion, number of oppositely charged ions get attracted by it, but, in a definite
number. In sodium chloride crystal each Na+ is surrounded by 6 C l- and
each C l– by six Na+ ions. Ionic compounds in the crystalline state consist
of orderly arranged cations and anions held together by electrostatic forcesof attractions in three dimensions. The crystal structure of sodium chloride
is given below:
NaCl is said to possess face centred cubic lattice crystal
structure (see figure-1).
The number of ions of opposite change that surround a
given ion of given charge is known as the coordination
number of that given ion.
For example, in sodium chloride crystal, the
coordination number of Na
+ is 6 and that of C l- is also 6.
Factors affecting the formation of cation and anion:
In previous lesson you have learnt about variation of
metallic and non metallic character of elements in a group
or period of the periodic table. Recall the facts about metallic and nonmetallic character of elements.
Generally elements of metals have tendency of losing electron to attain
the octet in their valence shell. This property is called as the metallic
character  or electropositivity . Elements with more electropositive
character form cations. Similarly non metals like oxygen (
8O), fluorine
(9F) and chlorine (17Cl) acquire electron configuration of elements of inert
gases by gaining electrons this property is called the non-metallic
character or electronegativity of the element . Elements with more
electronegative character form anions.fig-1Cl–Na+
Free distribution by A.P. Government 213•Can you explain the reasons for all these?
Ionic bond is formed between atoms of elements with electronegativity
difference equal to or greater than 1.9.
In ionic bond formation, you have noticed that atoms either lose
electrons or gain electrons to attain octet in valence shell. i.e., in an ionic
bond, transfer of electrons takes place between combining atoms.
The tendency of losing electrons to form cations (or) gaining electron
to form anions depends on the following factors:
i. Atomic size
ii. Ionisation potential
iii. Electron affinity
iv. Electronegativity
The atoms of elements with low ionisation energy, low electron affinity
high atomic size and low electronegativity form cations.
The atoms of elements with high ionisation potential, high electron
affinity, small atomic size and hight electronegativity form anions.
B. Covalent bond
G .N. Lewis (1916) proposed that atoms of some elements could
achieve an octet in their valence shells without transfer of electrons
between them. They can attain octet configuration in their valence shells
by sharing the valence electrons with one or more atoms.
The electrons shared between two atoms belong to both the atoms and
the sharing of electrons between them leads to the formation of a chemical
bond known as covalent bond .
For example, take two fluorine atoms which form a stable  molecule.
Each fluorine atom contributes one electron for bonding and the electron
pair that is formed in this way is mutually shared by both the fluorineatoms. Each atom in the F
2 molecule has an octet of valence electrons.

Chemical Bonding 214 X ClassThe dots around fluorine atom shows the valence electrons of
respective atoms.
The chemical bond formed between two atoms by mutual sharing of a
pair of valence shell electrons so that both of them can attain octet or
duplet in their valence shell is called the covalent bond .
The prefix co – is used to indicate when things are equal or joined.
(for example, co exist, cooperate etc). Here each atom contributes oneelectron from the valence shell for the bonding. Therefore, the name
covalent is given (equal valence electrons contribution) for this bond.
Formation of O2 molecule
The electronic configuration of 8O is 2, 6. Oxygen atom has six
electrons in its valence shell. It requires two more electrons to get octet
in its valence shell. Therefore oxygen atoms come close and each oxygen
atom contributes two electrons for bonding. Thus, there exist two covalent
bonds between two oxygen atoms in O2 molecule as there are two pairs of
electrons shared between them.
We can say that a double bond is formed between two oxygen atoms in
O2 molecule. Observe the following figures. Both the oxygen atoms have
octet in the valence shell.
•Can you say what type of bond exists between atoms of nitrogen
molecule?
Let us see
Nitrogen (N2) molecule
The electronic configuration of ‘N’ atom is 2,5 and to have octet in the
valence shell it requires three more electrons. When two nitrogen atoms
approach each other, each atom contributes 3 electrons for bonding. There
are six electrons shared between two nitrogen atoms in the form of three
pairs. Therefore, there is a triple bond between two nitrogen atoms in N2
molecule.

Free distribution by A.P. Government 215Methane (CH4) molecule
In the formation of methane, CH4 molecule, carbon contributes 4
electrons, (one electron to each hydrogen atom) and 4 hydrogen atoms
contribute one electron each. Thus in CH4 molecule, there are four C – H
covalent bonds as shown below:
Ammonia (NH3) molecule
In ammonia molecule, three N – H single covalent bonds are present.
Electron configuration of 7N  is 2, 5 and 1H is 1.
Nirogen atom contributes three electrons for bonding. Three hydrogen
atoms at the same time contribute one electron each for bonding. Six
electrons form three pairs and each pair is shared between nitrogen and
one hydrogen atom as shown below:

Chemical Bonding 216 X ClassWater (H2O) molecule
In water molecule (H2O), there are two O – H single covalents bonds.
Electron configuration of 8O is 2,6 and 1H is 1.
Oxygen atom needs ‘2’ electrons to attain octet in its valence shell.
Therefore it shares ‘2’ electron with two hydrogen atoms to form water
(H2O) molecule.
The total number of covalent bonds that an atom of an element forms
is called its ‘covalency’.
The Bond lengths and Bond energies of covalent bonds
Bond length or bond distance is the equilibrium distance between the
nuclei of two atoms which form a covalent bond.
It is generally given in nm (nanometer) or Å (Angstrom unit).
Bond energy or Bond dissociation energy is the energy needed to break
a covalent bond between two atoms of a diatomic covalent compound in
its gaseous state.
Draw backs of electronic theory of valence
1) When a covalent bond is formed between any two atoms, irrespective
of the nature of the atoms, the bond lengths and bond energies are expectedto be the same. This is because any covalent bond between any two atoms
is a result of mere sharing of two identical electrons. But, practically it
was observed that bond lengths and bond energies are not same when the
atoms that form the bond are different. (See table - 3)
•What do you understand from bond lengths and bond energies?
Do you know?
•An angstrom ( Å) is a  unit of length equal to 10-10 metre, or 0.1 nanometre, or
100 picometre.
•1 nanometre = 10-9 metre
Free distribution by A.P. Government 217•Are the values not different for the bonds between different types of atoms?
2) The theory could not explain why C lB eCl in BeC l2 is 1800, FBF in
BF3 is 120o, HCH in CH4 is
109028/, HNH in NH3 is
107018/  and HOH in H2O is
104o31/  etc.
i.e., it fails to explain the
shapes of the molecules.
Valence shell electron
pair repulsion theory
To explain the bond
angles in the molecules with
three or more than three
atoms with all atoms
attached to a central atom
through covalent bonds a
theory called the valence –
shell – electron – pair
repulsion – theory
(VSEPRT) was proposed by Sidgwick and Powell (1940). It was further
improved  by Gillespie and Nyholm (1957).
This theory suggests the following points.
1. VSEPRT considers electrons in the valence shells which are in covalent
bonds and in lone pairs as charge clouds that repel one another andstay as far apart as possible. This is the reason why molecules get
specific shapes.
2. If we know the total number of electron pairs in the valence shell as
covalent bonds and lone pairs in the central atom, it will help us to
predict the arrangement of those pairs around the nucleus of the centralatom and from that the shape of the molecule.
3. Lone pairs occupy more space around the central atom than bond pairs.
Lone pair means unshared electron pair or non-bonding electron pair.
These are attracted to only one nucleus where as the bond pair is shared
by two nuclei. Thus, the presence of lone pairs on the central atomcauses slight distortion of the bond angles from the expected regular
shape. If the angle between lone pair and bond pair increases at the
central atom due to more repulsion, the actual bond angles betweenatoms must be decreased.Bond Bond Bond (dissociation)
length ( Å) energy  (KJmol-1)
H –H 0.74 436
F – F 1.44 159Cl – Cl 1.95 243
Br – Br 2.28 193
I – I 2.68 151H – F 0.918 570
H – C l 1.27 432
H – Br 1.42 366
H – I 1.61 298
H – O (of H
2O) 0.96 460
H – N (of NH3) 1.01 390
H – C (of CH4) 1.10 410Table – 3∧∧
∧
∧
∧
Chemical Bonding 218 X Class
4.i) If  two bond pairs are present in two covalent bonds around the
nucleus of the central atom without any lone pairs in the valence shell,
they must be separated by 1800 to have minimum repulsion between them.
Thus, the molecule would be linear.
Example:
4.ii) If three bond pairs are there in three covalent bonds around the
nucleus of the central atom, without any lone pairs they get separated by
1200 along three corners of a triangle. Therefore, the shape of the molecule
is trigonal-planar.
Example:
NOTE: Did you notice that in BeC l2 and BF3 the central atoms Be and
B did not possess 8 electrons around them in the valence shell. They have
only 4 and 6 electrons respectively. These molecules are known as electrondeficient molecules.
4.iii)  If there are four bond pairs in the valence shell of the central
atom, the four bond pairs will orient along the four corners of a tetrahedron
(three dimensional arrangement) and the bond angle expected is 109
028/
.Example: Methane.
*In methane molecule (CH4), HCH is 109028/  because of four electron
pairs (bonding) around carbon, as shown below:
∧
Free distribution by A.P. Government 2194.iv)  If there are three bond pairs and one lone pair i.e., unshared
electron pair, then the lone pair occupies more space around the nucleus
of the central atom. The remaining three bond pairs come relatively closer
as in NH3 molecule.
Example: Ammonia
In ammonia (NH3) molecule, there are three bond pairs in
covalent bonds (3 N – H) around the nucleus of the nitrogen atomand one lone pair. Lone pair – bond pair repulsion is greater than
bond pair – bond pair repulsion. Therefore, NH
3 which is expected
to be tetrahedral with four electron pairs in the valence shell and
HNH = 109028/, it has HNH = 107048/  due to the more repulsion by lone
pair on the bond pairs.
The shape of the NH3 molecule is triagonal pyramidal with N at the
apex of the pyramid.
4.v) If there are two bond pairs and two lone pairs of electrons around
the nucleus of the central atom in its valence shell, lone pair – lone pair
repulsion is greater than lone pair – bond pair repulsion. Therefore, the
angle between bond pairs further decreases.
Example: Water
In water molecule, (H2O) there are four electron pairs around the
nucleus of oxygen atom, but, two of them are lone pairs and two bondpairs. Therefore, H
2O molecule gets ‘V’ shape or bent shape or angular
instead of tetrahedral shape as that of CH4 due to lone pair – lone pair
and lone pair – bond pair repulsions. HOH is 104031/.
•What is the bond angle in a molecule?
It is the angle subtended by two imaginary lines that pass from
the nuclei of two atoms which form the covalent bonds with the
central atom through the nucleus of the central atom at the central
atom. (see figure ‘ α’ is the bond angle).
Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion Theory (VSEPRT) mainly fails
in explaining the strengths of the bonds. This is because; the theory still
depends on the Lewis concept of covalent bond formation. It could notsay anything extra about the electronic nature of covalent bonds.
107048/////
ααααα
∧∧∧
Chemical Bonding 220 X ClassTo describe covalent bonding, a quantum mechanical model called
valence bond theory  has been suggested by Linus Pauling (1954).
Valence bond theory
To describe covalent bonding, a quantum mechanical model called
valence bond theory  has been suggested by Linus Pauling (1954). It is
explained as follows:
1. A covalent bond between two atoms is formed when the two atoms
approach each other closely and one atom overlaps its valence orbital
containing unpaired electron, the valence orbital of the other atom that
contains the unpaired electron of opposite spin. The so formed paired
electrons in the overlapping orbitals are attracted to the nuclei of both the
atoms. This bonds the two atoms together.
Eg: In the formation of H2 molecule, the 1s orbital of one ‘H’ atom
containing an unpaired electron overlaps the ‘1s’ orbital of the other ‘H’
atom containing unpaired electron of opposite spin giving H-H bond and
H2 molecule.
       H atom    H atom                        H2 molecule
2. The greater the overlapping of the orbitals that form the bond, the
stronger will be the bond. This gives a directional character to the bond
when other than ‘s’ orbitals are involved.
3. Each bonded atom maintains its own atomic orbitals but the electron
pair in the overlapping orbitals is shared by both the atoms involved in the
overlapping.
4. If two atoms form multiple bonds between them the first bond is
due to the overlap of orbitals along the inter-nuclear axis giving a strongersigma( σ) bond. After formation of ( σ) bond the other bonds are formed
due to the overlap of orbitals side wise or laterally giving weaker π bonds.
The ‘ σ’ bond is stronger because the electron pair shared is concentrated
more between the two nuclei due to end-end or head on overlap andattracted to both the nuclei. The π bond overlap gives a weaker bond due to
the lateral overlap of ‘p’ orbitals which is not to greater extent.
Consider C l-Cl molecule
17Cl  -  1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3px2 3py2 3pz1
In the formation of C l2 molecule, the 3pz orbital of one chlorine
atom containing an unpaired electron overlaps the 3pz orbital of other
chlorine atom that contains unpaired electron of opposite spin.

Free distribution by A.P. Government 221•How is HC l molecule formed?
The ‘1s’ orbital of ‘H’ atom containing unpaired electron overlaps the
‘3p’ orbital of chlorine atom containing unpaired electron of opposite spin.
Formation of N2 molecule
7N has electronic configuration 1s2 2s2 2px1 3py1 3pz1. Suppose that px
orbital of one ‘N’ atom overlaps the ‘px’ orbital of the other ‘N’ atom giving
σ px - px bond along the inter-nuclear axis. The py and pz orbitals of one ‘N’
atom overlap the py and pz orbital of other ‘N’ atom laterally, respectively
perpendicular to inter-nuclear axis giving π py-py and π pz-pz bonds.
Therefore, N2 molecule has a triple bond between two nitrogen atoms.
Formation of O2 molecule
8O has electronic configuration 1s2 2s2 2px2 3py1 3pz1. If the ‘py‘ orbital
of one ‘O’ atom overlaps the ‘py’ orbital of other ‘O’ atom along the inter-
nuclear axis, a sigma py- py bond   ( σpy- py) is formed. pz orbital of one ‘O’
atom overlaps the pz orbital of other ‘O’ atom laterally, perpendicular to
the inter-nuclear axis giving a π pz- pz bond. O2 molecule has a double
bond between two oxygen atoms.
Valence bond theory-Hybridisation
Formation of BeC l2 (Beryllium chloride) molecule
4Be has electronic configuration 1s2 2s2. It has no unpaired electrons.
It is expected not to form covalent bonds, but it forms two covalent bonds
one each with two chlorine atoms. To explain this, an excited state is
suggested for Beryllium in which an electron from ‘2s’ shifts to 2px level.
Electronic configuration of  4Be  1s2 2s1 2px1  and  17Cl  1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2
3px2 3py2 3pz1

Chemical Bonding 222 X ClassIf Be forms two covalent bonds with two chlorine atoms, one bond
should be σ2s-3p due to the overlap of ‘2s’ orbital of Be, the ‘3pz’ orbital
of one chlorine atom and the other bond should be σ2p-3p due to the overlap
of ‘2px’ orbital of Be atom the 3p orbital of the other chlorine atom. As the
orbitals overlapping are different, the bond strengths of two Be-C l must
be different. But, both bonds are of same strength and  C lBeCl is 1800. To
explain the discrepancies like this a phenomenon called ‘hybridisation of
atomic orbitals’ was proposed by Linus Pauling (1931).
Hybridisation  is a phenomenon of intermixing of atomic orbitals of
almost equal energy which are present in the outer shells of the atom and
their reshuffling or redistribution into the same number of orbitals but
with equal properties like energy and shape.
Be atom in its excited state allows its 2s orbital and 2px orbital which
contain unpaired electrons to intermix and redistribute to two identical
orbitals. As per Hund’s rule each orbital gets one electron. The new orbitals
based on the types of orbitals that have undergone hybridisation are called
sp orbitals. The two sp orbitals of Be get separated by 1800. Now, each
chlorine atom comes with its 3pz1 orbital and overlaps it the sp orbitals of
Be forming two identical Be-C l bonds ( σsp-p bonds) . ClBeCl  =  1800.
Both the bonds are of same strength.
Formation of BF3 molecule
5B has electronic configuration 1s2 2s2 2px1.
As it has one unpaired electron (2px1) it should form only one covalent
bond to give B-F molecule. But we get practically BF3 molecule.
To explain this, it is suggested that,
i.Boron (B) first undergoes excitation to get electronic configuration
1s2 2s1 2px1 2py1.
ii.As it forms three identical B-F bonds in BF3, it is suggested that
excited ‘B’ atom undergoes hybridisation. There is an intermixing of 2s,
2px, 2py orbitals and their redistribution into three identical orbitals called
sp2 hybrid orbitals. For three sp2 orbitals to get separated to have minimum
∧
∧
Boron triflouride
Free distribution by A.P. Government 223
repulsion the angle between any two orbitals is 1200
at the central atom and each sp2 orbital gets one
electron. Now three fluorine atoms overlap their
2pz orbitals containing unpaired electrons  (F9 1s2
2s2 2px2 2py2 2pz1) the three sp2 orbitals of ‘B’ that
contain unpaired electrons to form three σsp2-p
bonds.
Formation of NH3 molecule
One nitrogen atom and three hydrogen atoms are present in one
ammonia molecule. All the three N-H bonds are of same strength andHNH  = 107
048/
7N has electronic configuration 1s2 2s2 2px1 2py1 2pz1.
If three hydrogen atoms overlap their 1s orbitals on the three ‘p’
orbitals of nitrogen atom, they give identical σ p-s bonds but, then the
HNH should be equal to 900 where as 107048/ . To explain the discrepancy
in the bond angle ‘N’ atom is said to undergo sp3 hybridisation.
In this process  ‘2s’ and 2px, 2py, 2pz orbitals of nitrogen
intermix and redistribute into four identical sp3 orbitals. One
of the four sp3 orbitals get a pair of electrons and the other
three sp3 orbitals get one electron each. Now hydrogen atoms
overlap their 1s orbitals containing unpaired electrons the sp3
orbitals of ‘N’ atom containing unpaired electrons to give three
σs-sp3 bonds. HNH should be 1090 28/   for sp3 hybridisation. As there is
a lone pair in one of the sp3 orbitals, there is a greater lone pair – bond pair
repulsion which decreases the bond angle HNH to 107048/.
Shape of water molecule
It is found that HOH is 104031/  .
The electronic configuration of 8O is 1s2 2s2 2px2 2py1 2pz1 and
1H is 1s1.
Therefore, there should be two  σ s-p bonds due to the overlap of ‘s’
orbitals of two hydrogen atoms, the ‘p’ orbitals of oxygen atom which
contain unpaired electrons. HOH should be 900.
But HOH observed is 104031/ . To explain this, sp3
hybridisation is suggested for the valence orbitals of ‘O’ atom.
One s-orbital (2s) and three ‘p’ orbitals (2px, 2py, 2pz) intermix
and redistribute into four identical sp3 orbitals. As there are six
electrons and two sp3 orbitals get pairs and two sp3 orbitals get
one electron each. Now, the two sp3 orbitals of ‘O’ atom overlap
107048/////∧
∧
∧
∧
∧
∧Ammonia
∧
Chemical Bonding 224 X Classthe ‘s’ orbitals of two hydrogen atoms to give σsp3-s bonds. Due to the
lone pair – lone pair repulsions and lone pair – bond pair repulsions HOH
decreases from 109028/  (expected for sp3 – tetrahedral hybridisation) to
104031/.
CH4, C2H4 and C2H2 molecules and their structures will be explained
in carbon and its compounds chapter later in this class.
Properties of ionic and covalent compounds
Table -4
From the above table we understand that ionic compounds like NaC l
are solids at room temperature.
Polar compounds like HC l possess properties like melting point,
boiling point, reactivity, solubility etc, between those of ionic compounds
and covalent compounds. If the covalent bond is between atoms of twodifferent elements, the shared electron pair shift more towards the atom
of more electronegative element. Thus within the molecule the more
electronegative atom bears a partial negative charge and the less
electronegative atom bears a partial positive charge. A molecule of this
type which is neutral but possesses partial charges on the atoms within the
molecule is called a polar molecule and the bond is called a polar covalentbond or partial ionic and partial covalent bond.
Eg: H+C l  J
+δ -δ
H  -   C l
In ionic compounds there exist stronger electrostatic forces of
attractions between the oppositely charged ions of these compounds.
Therefore, they are solids with high melting points and boiling points. BasedS.No Property NaC l (ionic) HC l (polar covalent) C2H6 (covalent)
1. Formula mass 58.5 36.5 30.0
2. Physical appearance White crystalline solid Colourless gas Colourless gas
3. Type of bond Ionic Polar covalent Covalent
4. Melting point 801 0C -115 0C -183 0C
5. Boiling point 1413 0C -84.9 0C -88.63 0C
6. Solubility S oluble in polar Soluble in polar solvents Soluble in non-polar
solvents like water like water and to some solvents but insoluble
and insoluble in non extent in non-polar in polar solvents like
-polar solvents  solvents water
7. Chemical activity Highly reactive in polar Moderately Slow or very slow at
solvents and reactions reactive room temperature
are instantaneous∧

Free distribution by A.P. Government 225Key words
Electrons, noble gases, Lewis dot structures, Octet rule, chemical bond, Ionic
bond, covalent bond, cation, anion, electrostatic force, electrovalent, polar solvent,
non-polar solvent, formation of molecules, ionic compounds, covalent compounds,
electro positive character, electro negative character, polar bonds, bonded pairof electrons, lone pairs, bond length, bond energy, shape of the molecule, linear,
tetrahedral, properties of ionic and covalent compounds.on the principle “like dissolves in like”, they being highly polar, soluble in
polar solvents. In chemical reaction of solution of ionic compounds simply
rearrangement of ions take place in the solutions, the reactions areinstantaneous or very fast.
The forces of attractions among covalent molecules are weak.
Therefore, the covalent compounds are gases or liquid at room temperature.
They  have low melting points and low boiling points. Based on the principle
that “like dissolve in like” these covalent compounds are soluble in non-
polar solvents because of non-polar nature of solvent molecules. Inchemical reactions of covalent compounds there exist bond breaking and
bond forming to get products. There fore, these reactions are moderate or
very slow.
‘Like dissolves in like’ means what type of chemical bonds are there
in the solute particles that solute could be soluble in that solvent which
has the similar type of chemical bonds in its molecules.
What we have learnt
•Location of elements in the periodic table helps in predicting the type of bonding that will take
place between the elements.
•Ions are positively or negatively charged partiCles formed by the loss or gain of electrons.
•The force between any two atoms or a group of atoms that results in the formation of a stable
entity is called chemical bond.
•The outer most shell is called valence shell and electrons in this are called valence electrons.
•The gases belongs to ‘O’ group are called noble gases because they reluctant to combine otheratoms. Except helium all other noble gases have an octet of electron configuration  in theirvalence shell.
•The reason why atoms bond can be explained on the basis of the octet rule
•Chemically active elements have an incomplete octet in their valence shell of the atoms.
•The number of valence electrons available in the atoms decides the type of bond
•Elements which have tendency to gain electrons for attaining octet in their valence shell calledelectro negative character elements. They form anions.
•In the formation of ionic bond the atoms of electro positive elements lose their valence electronsto atoms of electro negative elements so that both of them can attain octet in their valence shell.
Chemical Bonding 226 X ClassImprove your learning
•The electrostatic attractive force that keeps cation and anion together to form a new electrically
neutral entity is called an ionic bond.
•Ionic compounds are often crystalline solids with high melting points.
•A chemical bond that formed by sharing of valence-shell electrons between the atoms so thatboth of them can attain octet or duplet in their valence shell is called covalent bond.
•A single covalent bond is formed when two atoms share a pair of electrons
•Each shared pair of electron is equivalent to a covalent bond.
•Electrons are not always shared equally between the atoms in a covalent bond. This leads tobond polarity.
•Formation of various molecules.
•Factors affecting the formation of cation and anion:
•To explain the bond angles in the molecules through covalent bonds the valence – shell –electron – pair repulsion theory (VSEPRT)
•Bond lengths and bond energies in covalent compounds
•Properties of ionic and covalent compounds.
1. List the factors that determine the type of bond that will be formed between two atoms? (AS1)
2. Explain the difference between the valence electrons and the covalency of an element. (AS1)
3 A chemical compound has the following Lewis notation:  (AS1)
a) How many valence electrons does element Y have?b) What is the valency of element Y?c) What is the valency of element X?
d) How many covalent bonds are there in the molecule?
e) Suggest a name for the elements X and Y.   (AS2)
4. Why do only valence electrons involve in bond formation? Why not electron of inner shells?
Explain.   (AS1)
5. Explain the formation of sodium chloride and calcium oxide on the basis of the concept of
electron transfer from one atom to another atom.  (AS1)
6. A, B, and C are three elements with atomic number 6, 11 and 17 respectively.
i. Which of these cannot form ionic bond? Why?  (AS1)
ii. Which of these cannot form covalent bond? Why?  (AS1)
iii. Which of these can form ionic as well as covalent bonds?  (AS1)
7. How bond energies and bond lengths of molecule helps us in predicting their chemical properties?
Explain with examples.  (AS1)
8. Predict the reasons for low melting point for covalent compounds when compared with ionic
compound. (AS2)
9.
Collect the information about properties and uses of covalent compounds and prepare a report? (AS4)
10. Draw simple diagrams to show how electrons are arranged in the following covalent molecules:
(AS5)
a) Calcium oxide (CaO) (b) Water (H2O) (c) Chlorine (C l2)
Fig-Q3
Free distribution by A.P. Government 227Multiple choice questionsFill in the blanks11. Represent the molecule H2O using Lewis notation.  (AS5)
12. Represent each of the following atoms using Lewis notation:    (AS5)
(a) beryllium   (b) calcium (c) lithium
13. Represent each of the following molecules using Lewis notation:   (AS5)
(a) bromine gas (Br2) (b) calcium chloride (CaC l2) (c) carbon dioxide (CO2)
(d) Which of the three molecules listed above contains a double bond?
14. Two chemical reactions are described below.    (AS5)
• Nitrogen and hydrogen react to form ammonia (NH3)
• Carbon and hydrogen bond to form a molecule of methane (CH4).
For each reaction, give:
(a) The valency of each of the atoms involved in the reaction.  (AS1)
(b) The Lewis structure of the product that is formed.   (AS5)
15.  How Lewis dot structure helps in understanding bond formation between atoms? (AS6)
16. What is octet rule? How do you appreciate role of the ‘octet rule’ in explaining the chemical
properties of elements? (AS6)
17. Explain the formation of the following molecules using valence bond theory
a) N2 molecule b) O2 molecule
18. What is hybridisation? Explain the formation of the following molecules using hybridisation
a) Be C l2b) BF3
1. Electrons in ............ shell are called valence electrons.
2. Except ............. gas all other noble gases have octet in their valence shell.3. Covalency of elements explains about member of ................ formed by the atom.
4. Valence bond theory was proposed by .........................
5. In …………………bonding the valence electrons are shared among all the atoms of the metallic
elements.
1) Which of the following elements is electronegative? [ ]
a) Sodium b) Oxygen c) Magnesium d) Calcium
2) An element 
11X23 forms an ionic compound with another element ‘Y’. Then the charge on the
ion formed by X is [ ]a) +1 b) +2 c) -1 d) -2
3) An element ‘A’ forms a chloride AC l
4. The number electrons in the valence shell of ‘A’
a) 1 b) 2 c) 3 d)  4 [ ]
Electric Current 228 X ClassIn previous classes, you had learnt about electric current, battery,
electric circuit and its components.
•What do you mean by electric current?
•Which type of charge (positive or negative) flows through an electric
wire when it is connected in an electric circuit?
•Is there any evidence for the motion of charge in daily life situations?
In class VIII you learned about lightning. Lightning is an electric
discharge between two clouds or between cloud and earth. This electric
discharge through air appears to us as an electric spark or lightning.
Lightning is a live example which provides evidence for the motion of
charge in the atmosphere.
•Does motion of charge always lead to electric current?Let us see.
Activity 1
Situation 1: Take a bulb, a battery, a switch and few insulated copper
wires. Connect the ends of the copper wires to the terminals of the battery
through the bulb and switch. Now switch on the circuit and observe the
bulb.
•What do you notice?
Situation 2 : Remove the battery from the circuit and connect the
remaining components to make a complete circuit. Again switch on the
circuit and observe the bulb. Does the bulb glow?Electric Current11Chapter

Free distribution by A.P. Government 229Situation 3: Replace the copper wires with nylon wires and connect
the nylon wires to the terminals of the battery through a bulb and switch.
Now switch on the circuit and observe the bulb. Does the bulb glow?
After doing these activities you will notice that the bulb glows only in
situation 1.
•Can you predict the reason for the bulb not glowing in situations 2 and
3?
In class VII, you have learnt that the battery stores chemical energy
and this energy converts into electric energy and makes the bulb to glow
as you observed in situation 1 i.e. the battery supplies the required energy
to make the bulb glow. But in situation 3, though there is a battery in the
circuit, the bulb does not glow because the connecting wires (nylon wires)
are not able to carry the energy from source (battery) to bulb.
Hence, the nature of the substance plays an important role in the transfer
of energy from battery to bulb. The material which transfers energy from
battery (source) to the bulb is called a conductor and the material which
cannot transfer energy from battery (source) to the bulb is called a non
conductor.
•Why do all materials not act as conductors?
•How does a conductor transfer energy from source to bulb?Let us see.
Electric current
Drude and Lorentz, scientists of the 19th century, proposed that
conductors like metals contain a large number of free electrons while the
positive ions are fixed in their locations. The arrangement of the positive
ions is called lattice.
Let us understand the behaviour of electrons in lattice space. Assume
that a conductor is an open circuit. The electrons move randomly in lattice
space of a conductor as shown in figure 1. When the electrons are in random
motion, they can move in any direction. Hence, if you imagine any cross
section as shown in figure 1, the number of electrons, crossing the cross
section of a conductor from left to right in one second is equal to that of
electrons passing the cross section from right to left in one second. It
means that net charge moving along a conductor
through any cross section is zero when the conductor
is in open circuit.
•What happens to the motion of electrons when
the ends of the conductor are connected to the
battery?
fig-1: Random motion of
electrons
(in open circuit)
Electric Current 230 X ClassWhen the ends of the conductor are connected
to the battery through a bulb, the bulb glows because
energy transfer takes place from battery to the bulb.The electrons are responsible for this transfer of
energy. If the electrons are responsible for transfer
of energy from battery to bulb, they must have an ordered motion. When
the electrons are in ordered motion, there will be a net charge crossing
through any cross section of the conductor. See figure 2. This ordered
motion of electrons is called electric current.
Thus we can say that electric current is ordered motion of charges.
Let us define electric current quantitatively,
Electric current is defined as the amount of charge crossing any cross
section of the conductor in one second.
Let Q be the charge crossing through any cross section of the conductor
in a time interval t. Then the amount of charge crossing through that cross
section in one second is Q/t. Therefore,
Electric current = electric charge/time interval
I = Q/tThe SI unit of electric current is ampere denoted by A.
1 Ampere = 1 Coloumb/1 Second
1 A = 1 C/s
•Why do electrons move in specified direction?
When the conductor is not connected to the circuit through a battery,
the electrons inside the conductor are in random motion but when the
conductor is connected to a battery, the electrons move in a specifieddirection. This shows that something causes the electron to move it in a
specified direction.  When the ends of the conductor are connected to the
terminals of a battery a uniform electric field is set up throughout theconductor. This field makes the electrons move in a specified direction.
•In which direction do the electrons move?
•Do the electrons accelerate continuously?
•Do they move with a constant speed?The free electrons in the conductor are accelerated by the electric
field and move in a direction opposite to the direction of the field. When
electrons are in motion under the influence of the field, they collide with
lattice ions, lose energy and may even come to a halt at every collision.They are again accelerated by the electric field and make collisions with
other lattice ions. In this way they continue to move along the conductor.
fig-2: Ordered motion
of electrons
Free distribution by A.P. Government 231The motion of electron is shown in figure 3.
Hence, we assume that electrons in the
conductor move with a constant average speed.  We
call this speed as drift speed or drift velocity.
Let us calculate the drift speed of free charges
quantitatively.
Consider a conductor with cross sectional area A. Assume that the
ends of the conductor are connected to a battery to make the current flow
through it. Let vd be the drift speed of the charges as shown in figure 4 and
n be the number of charges present in the conductor
in an unit volume (charge density). The distance
covered by each charge in one second is vd. Then
the volume of the conductor for this distance is equal
to Avd (see figure 4). The number of charges
contained in that volume is equal to nAvd. Let q be
the charge of each carrier. Then the total charge crossing the cross sectionalarea at position D in one second is nqAv
d. This is equal to electric current.
Hence,
Electric current I = nqAvd………………. (1)
Therefore, vd = I/nqA ………………. (2)
We know that the charge carriers in a conductor are electrons. The
magnitude of electric charge ‘e’ is 1.602 x 10-19C.
Let us calculate the drift speed of electron in a copper wire carrying a
current of 1A and cross sectional area A = 10-6 m2. The electron density of
copper that was found experimentally is n = 8.5x1028m–3. Substituting these
values in equation (2) with q = e, we get,
vd = 1/(8.5x1028x10-6x1.6x10-19)
vd = 7x10-5m/s = 0.07mm/s
This shows that the electrons are moving very slowly.
•Why does a bulb glow immediately when we switch on?
When we switch on any electric circuit, irrespective of length of the
connecting wire (conductor) an electric field is set up throughout the
conductor instantaneously due to the potential difference of the source(battery) connected to the circuit. This electric field makes all the electrons
to move in a specified direction simultaneously.
•How can we decide the direction of electric current?
The equation I = nqAv
d Indicates that the values of n and A are positive.
The direction of electric current is determined by the signs of the charge
fig-3: Motion of electronPotential difference
Direction of electric fieldA B
fig-4: Drift of positive chargesA (cross section area)D
vd
vd
Electric Current 232 X Classq and drift speed vd. For electrons (negative charges), q is negative and vd
is positive. Then the product of q and vd is negative. This negative sign
shows that the direction of electric current is opposite to the flow of
negative charge. For positive charges the product of q and vd is positive.
Hence, the direction of electric current can be taken as the direction offlow of positive charges.
•How can we measure electric current?
Usually an ammeter is used to measure electric current. It is always
connected in series to the circuit.
•Where do the electrons get energy for their motion from?
Potential Difference
When the ends of a conducting wire are connected to the terminals of
a battery, an electric field is setup throughout the conductor. This field
exerts a force on the charge (electron). Let Fe be the force exerted by the
electric field on a free charge q. The free charges accelerate in the directionof the electric field (If the free charges are electrons, then the directionof electric force on them is opposite to the direction of electric field). It
means the electric field does some work to move free charges in a specified
direction.
•Can you find the work done by the electric force?
Let the electric force made the charges move
through a distance ‘ l’ from A to B as shown in
figure 5. We know that, the work is the product of
force and distance along the direction of force.
Hence, work done by the electric force on a
free charge q is given by
W = F
e l
What is the work done by the electric force on unit charge?
Work done by the electric force on unit charge = W/q = Fe l/q
Work done by the electric force on unit positive charge to move it
through a distance ‘ l’ from A to B is called potential difference between
those points. Potential difference is denoted by a symbol V . The potential
difference between two points separated by a distance l in a conducting
wire is given by,
V = W/q = Fe l/q
fig-5FeDirection of electric field
AB
l
Free distribution by A.P. Government 233This potential difference is also called voltage. The SI unit of potential
difference is “V olt” and it is denoted by V .
1 Volt = 1 Joule/1 Coulomb
1V = 1J/C
•What is the direction of electric current in terms of potential
difference?
•Do positive charges move in a conductor? Can you give an example of
this?
Let us recall your experience of electrolysis and electroplating and
conductivity of fluids that you had learned in earlier classes. When electric
current is allowed to pass through fluids, the positive ions (cations) and
negative ions (anions) move in opposite directions. The direction of the
motion of positive charges in an electrolyte is always in the direction ofthe electric field while negative charges move in a direction opposite to
that of positive charges. Thus for conduction in fluids there exists motion
of both positive and negative charges. Whereas in case of metal conductorsthere will be only motion of electrons. (The positive charges are fixed in
the lattice)
If positive charges move from point A to B in a conductor, the electric
field does positive work so W/q is positive for free positive charges. You
can say that the direction of the electric field is from A to B and the pointA is at high potential and point B is at low potential. As negative charges
always move in a direction opposite to the electric field we consider that
electrons move from low potential to high potential.
We know that in a battery or cell a constant potential difference is
maintained till the battery is completely discharged.
•How does a battery maintain a constant potential difference between
its terminals?
•Why does the battery discharge when its positive and negative terminalsare connected through a conductor?
To answer this, we need to know about how a battery or a cell works.
A battery consists of two metal plates (electrodes) and a chemical
(electrolyte). The electrolyte (chemical) between the two metal plates
consists of positive and negative ions which move in opposite directions(see figure 6). The electrolyte exerts a certain force on these ions and
makes them move in a specified direction. Let us call this force as a
chemical force (F
c). Depending upon the nature of the chemical, positive
ions move towards one of the plates and accumulate on that plate. As a
Electric Current 234 X Classresult of this accumulation of charges on this plate it becomes positively
charged (called anode). Negative ions move in a direction opposite to the
motion of positive ions and accumulate on the other plate. As a result ofthis the plate becomes negatively charged (called cathode). This
accumulation of different charges on respective plates continues till both
plates are sufficiently charged.
But the ions in motion experience another force when sufficient
number of charges are accumulated on the plates. Let us call this force as
electric force (F
e). The direction of this force is opposite to the direction
of chemical force Fc and the magnitude of this force depends on the amount
of charge accumulated on the plates.
The motion of ions continue towards their
respective plates if the chemical force Fc is
stronger than electric force  Fe. See figure 7.
The accumulation of charges on plates is
continuous till the electric force Fe becomes
equal to chemical force Fc. At this situation
there will not be any motion in ions due tobalance of forces F
e and Fc. It is shown in
figure 8. The new battery that we buy fromthe shop is at a stage where the ions in theelectrolyte are under the influence of
balanced forces. See figure 9. This is the
reason for the constant potential difference
between the terminals of a battery.
The amount of charge accumulated on the
plates depends on nature of the chemical used
in the battery.
•What happens when the battery is
connected in a circuit?
When a conducting wire is connected to
the terminals of the battery, a potential
difference is created between the ends of theconductor. This potential difference sets up
an electric field throughout the conductor
(the direction of electric field is frompositive terminal to negative terminal in the
conductor).fig-6
fig-7
fig-8
fig-9Fc Fe
Fe Fc
FcFe
FeFc
Free distribution by A.P. Government 235We know that the conductor contains large number of electrons. The
electrons near the positive terminal of the battery are attracted by it and
start to move towards positive terminal. As a result, the amount of positivecharge on this plate decreases. So the electric force F
e becomes weaker
than chemical force Fc and chemical force pulls negative ions from the
positive plate (anode) and makes them move towards the negative plate(cathode). The negative terminal pushes one electron into the conductor
because of stronger repulsion between negative terminal and negative ion.
Hence, the total number of electrons in the conductor remains constantduring the current flow. The above said process continuous till equilibrium
is attained between the forces F
e and Fc.
Electromotive force (emf)
When the ends of the conductor are connected to the terminals of a
battery, the electrons in the conductor move with a drift speed from negative
terminal to positive terminal because of the electric force acting on them.
At the same time negative ions of equal amount of charge move from
positive terminal to negative terminal against the electric force (Fe) because
of the chemical force acting on them within battery. Thus, some chemical
energy is spent to move ions in the battery. It means that an amount of
work is done by the chemical force (Fc).
Let us assume that work done by the chemical force to move a negative
charge q from positive terminal to negative terminal against the electric
force Fe be ‘W’ and also assume that the magnitude of chemical force Fc is
equal to magnitude of electric force (Fe).
The work done on negative charge q by the chemical force, W = Fcd
where ‘d’ is the distance between the terminals. Then work done by the
chemical force to move 1 Columb charge from positive terminal to negativeterminal is given by, W/q = F
cd/q. We know that Fc = Fe, then we get
W/q = Fed/q.
This W/q is the work done by the chemical force on unit negative
charge to move it from positive terminal to negative terminal. This is called
emf ( ε).
ε = W/q = Fed/q
Generally, emf is defined as the work done by the chemical force to
move unit positive charge from negative terminal to positive terminal ofthe battery.
•How can we measure potential difference or emf?
Electric Current 236 X ClassGenerally a volt meter is used to measure potential difference or emf
across an electric device like battery. It must be connected in parallel to
the electric device to measure the potential difference across the ends ofthe electric device.
When a battery in a torch is used for several weeks, the light from its
bulb becomes dim. We say that the battery or cell in the torch is discharged.
What does it mean?
•Is there any relation between emf of battery and drift speed of electrons
in the conductor connected to a battery?
Ohm’s law
Aim:  To show that the ratio V/I is a constant for a conductor.
Materials required:   5 dry cells of 1.5V each, conducting wires, an
ammeter, a volt meter, thin iron spoke of length 10cm, LED and key.
Procedure:  Connect a circuit as shown in figure
10. Solder the conducting wires to the ends of the
iron spoke.  Close the key. Note the readings of
current from ammeter and potential difference from
volt meter in table 1.
Table:1
Now connect two cells (in series) instead of one cell in the circuit.
Note the respective readings of the ammeter and volt meter and record the
values in table 1. Repeat the same for three cells, four cells and five cells
respectively. Record the values of potential difference (V) and current (I)
corresponding to each case in the table 1. Find V/I for each set of values.
What do you notice? The ratio V/I is a constant. We can write this
mathematically asLab Activity
fig-10AV
Iron spoke
key Battery
SI.No. Potential difference (V) Current (I) V/II
Free distribution by A.P. Government 237V ∝ I
From this experiment we can conclude that the potential
difference between the ends of the iron spoke (conductor) is
directly proportional to the current passing through it (assuming
the temperature of the iron spoke is constant during the flowof current through it).
Draw a graph between V and I taking the current (I) along
y-axis and potential difference (V) along x-axis with appropriate
scale. You will get a straight line graph passing through the
origin as shown in figure 11.
Repeat the process by using a LED instead of iron spoke.
The long terminal of the LED is connected to the positive
terminal of the battery and short terminal of the LED is
connected to negative terminal of the battery. Note the values
of current ‘I’ and potential difference ‘V’ in each case and recordthe values in table 1 (draw this table in your notebook). Find
V/I for each set of values I and V . You will notice that the ratio
V/I is not a constant. Draw a graph between V and I for LED.You will get a curved graph as shown in figure 12.
From the above lab activity we can conclude that the ratio between V
and I is constant for some materials at constant temperature. This fact was
established by German Physicist, George Simon Ohm and it is popularly
known as Ohm’s law.
We can define Ohm’s law as follow.
The potential difference between the ends of a conductor is directly
proportional to the electric current passing through it at constant
temperature.
Let V be the potential difference between the ends of the conductor
and I be the current passing through it.
V ∝ I   (temperature is constant)
V/I = Constant
This constant is called resistance of the conductor. It is denoted by
‘R’. Then we get V/I = R.
V = IRThe SI unit of resistance is ohm. The symbol of ohm is Ω.
1 Ohm = 1 V olt/1 Ampere1 Ω = 1V/A
fig-11V
(in volt)I
(in ampere)
fig-12V
(in volt)I
(in ampere)
Electric Current 238 X Class•Can you guess the reason why the ratio of V and I in case of LED is not
constant?
•Do all materials obey Ohm’s law?
•Can we classify the materials based on Ohm’s law?
Based on Ohm’s law materials are classified into two categories. Those
which obey Ohm’s law are called ohmic materials. For example, metals
are ohmic materials. Those which do not obey Ohm’s law are called non
ohmic materials. For example, LEDs are non ohmic materials.
Limitations of Ohm’s Law
Ohm’s law is valid for metal conductors provided the temperature and
other physical conditions remain constant. The resistance of the material
changes with temperature. Hence for changing temperature the V-I graph
for a conductor will be non-linear. Ohm’s law is not applicable to gaseous
conductors. It is also not applicable to semiconductors such as germanium
and silicon.
•What is resistance?
•Is the value of resistance the same for all materials?
When a conductor is connected to a battery the free electrons start
moving with a drift speed in a specified direction. During the motion, the
electrons collide with positive ions (fixed) of the lattice and come to halt.
This means that they lose mechanical energy in the form of heat. Due to
the electric field that was set up by the battery throughout the conductor,
these electrons regain the energy from the field and proceed to move. The
motion of electrons is obstructed by the lattice ions. The obstruction
offered to the flow of electrons in a conductor by lattice ions depends
upon the nature of the material.
Therefore, the resistance  of a conductor is defined as the obstruction
to the motion of the electrons in a conductor. The material which offersresistance to the motion of electrons is called resistor .
•Is there any application of Ohm’s law in daily life?
•What causes electric shock in the human body – current or voltage?
Let us see.
Electric shock
Let us assume that human body is a resistor. The resistance of the
human body generally varies from 100 Ω (if body is wet with salt water)
to 5,00,000 Ω (if the skin is very dry).  Let us calculate the amount of
current that flows through the human body. Let us assume you have touched
the two electrodes of a battery of 24V with dry fingers in such a way that
the circuit is complete. Let your body resistance be 1,00,000 Ω. Then the
Free distribution by A.P. Government 239current flowing through your body is given by I = 24/100000 = 0.00024A.
This current is very small. When such small current passes through the
human body, it does not affect the functioning of various organs inside thebody.
•Do you know the voltage of mains that we use in our household
circuits?
•What happens to our body if we touch live wire of 240V?
The current passing through our body when we touch a live wire of
240V is given by I = 240/100000 = 0.0024A. When this quantify of current
flows through the body the functioning of organs inside the body gets
disturbed. This disturbance inside the body is felt as electric shock. If the
current flow continues further, it damages the tissues of the body whichleads to decrease in resistance of the body. When this current flows for a
longer time, damage to the tissues increases and thereby the resistance of
human body decreases further. Hence, the current through the human bodywill increase. If this current reaches 0.07A, it effects the functioning of
the heart and if this much current passes through the heart for more than
one second it could be fatal. If this current flows for a longer time, theperson in electric shock is being killed. See the table 2 that describes the
effects of electric current on human body.
Table-2
From the above discussions, we can conclude that an electric shock
can be experienced when there is a potential difference exists between
one part of the body and another part. When current flows through human
body, it chooses the path which offers low resistance. The resistance of a
body is not uniform throughout it. For example, skin offers more resistancethan the organs inside the body. As long as current flow continues inside
the body the current and resistance of human body goes on changing
inversely. Hence, the electric shock is a combined effect of potential
difference, electric current and resistance of the human body.Current in
ampereEffect
0.001 Can be felt
0.005 Is painful
0.010 Causes involuntary muscle contractions (spasms)
0.015 Causes loss of muscle control
0.070 If through the heart, causes serious disruption ; probably fatal if current
lasts for more than 1 s
Electric Current 240 X Class•Why doesn’t a bird get a shock when it stands on a high voltage wire?
There are two parallel transmission lines on electric poles. The potential
difference between these two lines is 240V throughout their lengths. If
you connect any conducting device across these two wires, it causes current
to flow between the wires. When the bird stands on a high voltage wire,there is no potential difference between the legs of the bird because it
stands on a single wire. So no current passes through the bird. Hence, it
doesn’t feel any electric shock.
Factors affecting the resistance of a material
Temperature and resistance
Activity 2
Measure the resistance of the bulb when it is in open circuit using a
multi meter. To measure the resistance of a bulb set the multi meter as
ohm meter and place the multi meter knob at 20K Ω. Now place the leads
of the multi meter on the terminals of the bulb. The meter will show one
of the following readings.
- 0.00 or 1 or the actual resistance of the bulb.
Do you know?
A multi meter is an electronic measuring instrument that combines several
measurement functions in one unit.
Digital multi meter displays the measured value in
numerals.
A multi meter has three parts
Display: The display usually has four digits and the ability
to display a negative sign.
Selection knob: The selection knob allows the user to
set the multi meter to read different functions such as
milliamps (mA) of current, voltage (V) and resistance ( Ω).
Ports: Multi meters generally have two ports. One is
usually labelled as ‘COM’ (common or ground port). This is
where black test lead is connected. The other is labelled as
mA V Ω  port where the red lead is conventionally plugged in.
WARNING: Most multi meters can measure AC quantities also, but AC circuits
can be dangerous. So measure DC quantities only.

Free distribution by A.P. Government 241−Ιf the multi meter reads 1, or displays OL, it’s overloaded. You will
need to try a higher mode such as 200K Ω or 2M Ω etc.
−If the multi meter reads 0.00 or nearly 0, then you need to lower the
mode to 2K Ω or 200 Ω.
Note the value of resistance in your note book. Connect a circuit with
components as shown in figure 13. Switch on the circuit. After few minutes,
measure the resistance of the bulb again as explained
above. Note this value in your note book. What
difference do you notice between these two
readings? The value of resistance of the bulb insecond instance is more than the resistance of the
bulb in open circuit.
•What could be the reason for increase in the
resistance of the bulb when current flows
through it?
You will notice that the bulb gets heated. The increase in temperature
of the filament in the bulb is responsible for increase in resistance of the
bulb. Hence we can conclude that there is a relation between resistance of
the bulb and its temperature.
Thus the value of resistance of a conductor depends on temperature
for constant potential difference between the ends of the conductor.
Nature of material and resistance
Activity 3
Collect different metal rods of the same length and same cross
sectional area like copper, aluminum, iron etc. Make
a circuit as shown in figure 14. P and Q are the free
ends of the conducting wires. Connect one of the
metal rods between the ends P and Q. Switch on thecircuit. Measure the electric current using the
ammeter connected to the circuit and note it in your
notebook. Repeat this with other metal rods and
measure electric currents in each case. What do you
notice? The values of current are different for different metal rods for a
constant potential difference.
From this activity, we conclude that the resistance of a conductor
depends on the material of the conductor.
•What happens to the resistance of a conductor if we increase its length?
fig-13key BatteryI
fig-14keyBatteryIPQdifferent metal rods are connected
between P and Q
A
Electric Current 242 X ClassLet us find out.
Length of the conductor and resistance
Activity 4
Collect iron spokes of different lengths with the same cross sectional
areas. Make a circuit as shown in figure 14. Connect one of the iron spokes,
say 10cm length, between P and Q. Measure the value of the current usingthe ammeter connected to the circuit and note the value in your note book.
Repeat this for other lengths of the iron spokes. Note corresponding values
of currents in your note book. What do you notice? The current decreases
with increase in the length of the spoke. Thus the resistance of each spoke
increases with increase in the length for a constant potential difference.
From this activity, we can conclude that the resistance (R) of a
conductor is directly proportional to its length ( l) for a constant potential
difference.
i.e.
R ∝ l    (at constant temperature and cross sectional area)
.................. (1)
•Does the thickness of a conductor influence its resistance?
Let us find out.
Crosssection area and resistance
Activity 5
Collect iron rods of equal lengths but different cross section areas.
Make a circuit as shown in figure 14. Connect one of the rods between
points P and Q. Note the value of the current using the ammeter connectedto the circuit and note it in your note book. Repeat this with other rods.
Note the corresponding values of currents in each case and note them in
your note book. You will notice that the current flowing through the rod
increases with increase in its cross sectional area. Hence, the resistance
of a rod decreases with increase in the cross section area of the rod.
From this activity, we conclude that the resistance of a conductor is
inversely proportional to its cross section area.
i.e.
R ∝ 1/A    (at constant temperature and length of the conductor)
.................. (2)
From the equations (1) and (2), we get
R ∝l/A     (at constant temperature)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 243R = ρl/A
Where, ρ is a proportionality constant and it
is called specific resistance or resistivity. See
figure 15 to get clear picture of this equation.
Specific resistance depends on the
temperature and nature of the material where asthe resistance of the conductor depends on natureof material, temperature and geometrical factors
like length and cross section area of the
conductor.
The SI unit of resistivity is Ω - m.
The reciprocal of resistivity is called conductivity ( σ).
The values of resistivity of material determine their conductivity.
Metals with low resistivity behave as good conductors. Metals such ascopper are therefore used for making electricwires. The filament of an electric bulb isusually made of tungsten, because of its higherresistivity values and melting point (3422
0C).
The values of resistivity of insulators are
very high of the order of 1014  to 1016 Ω-m.
Alloys like Nichrome (Nickel, chromium and
iron) and Manganese (86% copper, 12%manganese, 2% nickel) have 30-100 timeslarger values of resistivity than those of metals.This makes them suitable for use in the heatingelements of electric irons, toasters etc. These
alloys also have the advantage that their
resistance varies very little with temperatureand they do not oxidise easily. The resistivityof materials such as silicon and germaniumare 10
5 to 1010 times more than that of metals,
but 1015 to 1016 times less than that of
insulators. Such materials are called
semiconductors. Semiconductors are used tomake diodes, transistors and integratedCircuits (ICs). ICs are used in all sorts of
electronic devices, including computer, TV ,
mobile phones etc.Material ρρρρρ(ΩΩΩΩΩ-m) at 20 °C
Silver 1.59 × 10-8
Copper 1.68 × 10-8
Gold 2.44 × 10-8
Aluminium 2.82 × 10-8
Calcium 3.36 × 10-8
Tungsten 5.60 × 10-8
Zinc 5.90 × 10-8
Nickel 6.99 × 10-8
Iron 1.00 × 10-7
Lead 2.20 × 10-7
Nichrome 1.10 × 10-6
Carbon (Graphite) 2.50 × 10-6
Germanium 4.60 × 10-1
Drinking water 2.00 × 10-1
Silicon 6.40 × 102
Wet wood 1.00 × 103
Glass 10.0 × 1010
Rubber 1.00 × 1013
Air 1.30 × 1016Table 3
Resistivity of various materials
fig-15I
IA
l
Potential
difference (V)
Electric Current 244 X Class•How are electric devices connected in circuits?
Electric Circuits
A closed path created by the connecting wires through a battery along
which electrons can flow is called a circuit. For a continuous flow of
electrons in the circuit it must be a complete circuit with no gaps left in
between. Usually a gap is provided in the circuit by an electric switch that
can be opened or closed to either cut off or allow current flow through thecircuit. Circuits may have more than one device (called as component)
that receives electric energy from the source. These devices are commonly
connected in the circuit either in series or in parallel.
When the components of the circuit are connected in series, there
will be a single path for flow of electrons between the terminals of the
battery, generator or wall socket (which is simply and extension of these
terminals). When these components are connected in parallel, they form
branches and each branch provides a separate path for the flow of electrons.
Both the series and parallel connections have their own distinctive
characteristics. We shall briefly study circuits, using these two types ofconnections.
Series connection of resistors
Activity 6
Take different bulbs. Measure their resistances with a multi meter.
Note their values in your book as R1, R2, R3.
Connect them as shown in figure 16.
Measure the potential difference between
terminals of the battery connected to the circuit.Measure the potential differences between the
ends of each bulb and note them as V
1, V2 and V3
from voltmeters in your note book. Compare
the potential difference of the battery and
resistors.
•     What do you notice?
The sum of the potential differences of the
bulbs is equal to potential difference across the combination of the
resistors. Then we get,
V = V1 + V2 + V3......................... (1)
fig-16key BatteryI
AV1V2V3
Free distribution by A.P. Government 245Measure the value of the current flowing in the circuit with help of the
ammeter. Note its values in your book as I.
•What do you notice?
Equivalent resistance of a series
connection:
Observe figure 17. In this figure the bulbs
are shown as resistors with symbols.
In series connection of resistors there is
only one path for the flow of current in the
circuit. Hence, the current in the circuit isequal to I.
According to Ohm’s law,
Potential difference across R
1 is ,   V1 = IR1
Potential difference across R2 is ,    V2 = IR2
Potential difference across R3 is ,    V3 = IR3
Let Req is the equivalent resistance of the combination of resistors in
series.
•What do you mean by equivalent resistance?
If the current drawn by a resistor is equal to the current drawn by the
combination of resistors then the resistor is called as equivalent resistor
(provided the source in the circuit is constant).
So, we have V = I Req
Substituting the values of V1, V2, V3 and V in the equation (1), we get
IReq =  IR1 + IR2 + IR3
Req =  R1 + R2 + R3
From the above equation you can conclude that the sum of individual
resistances is equal to their equivalent resistance when the resistors are
connected in series.
•What happens when one of the resistors in series breaks down?
When one of the resistors in series breaks down, the circuit becomes
open and flow of current cannot take place in the circuit. This is the reason
why household electrical appliances are not connected in series.
•Can you guess in what way household wiring has been done?
Let us seefig-17
fig-18II
IIR1R2R3
ReqV1V2V
V3
V
Electric Current 246 X ClassParallel Connection of resistors
Activity 7
Use the bulbs used in activity 6 and connect
these bulbs as shown in figure 19.
Measure the potential difference across each
bulb using a voltmeter or multi meter. Note these
values in your note book. What do you notice? Thepotential difference at the ends of each bulb is the
same. These bulbs are said to be in parallel conne
ction. Measure electric currents flowing through
each bulb using ammeters. Note these values.
Let I
1,I2 and I3 be the currents flowing through
R1, R2 and R3 resistors respectively.
• How much current is drawn from the battery?
•Is it equal to individual currents drawn by the resistors?
Measure the current (I) drawn from the battery using the ammeter 1.
You will notice that the current drawn from the battery is equal to the sum
of individual currents drawn by the bulbs.
Hence we can write
I = I1 + I2 + I3.................. (1)
Equivalent resistance of a parallel connection
The schematic circuit of figure 19 is shown in
figure 20.
According to the Ohm’s law,
Current through R1 is,    I1 = V/R1
Current through R2 is,     I2 = V/R2
Current through R3, is,    I3 = V/R3
Let Req be the equivalent resistance of the
resistors is parallel. It is shown in figure 21.
Then we get;      I = V/Req
Substituting the values I, I1, I2 and I3 in equation (1), we get
V/Req = V/R1 +V/R2 + V/R3
1/Req = 1/R1 + 1/R2 + 1/R3
Let two resistors R1 and R2 are connected in parallel,
1/Req = 1/R1 + 1/R2
Req = R1R2/(R1+R2)
fig-19key BatteryI
AAAA
ammeter 1PI1
I2
I3Q
fig-20
fig-21I
III
AAAAI1
I2
I3R1
R2
R3
Req
Free distribution by A.P. Government 247The equivalent resistance of a parallel combination is less than the
resistance of each of the resistors.
You can use this result to explain why the resistance of a metal wire is
inversely proportional to its area of cross section. Let us imagine a thick
wire as a parallel combination of several thin wires. Then the resistance ofthe combination is less than that of each thin wire. In other words, theresistance of a thick wire is less than that of a thin wire.
Though the methods discussed in the previous section for replacing
series and parallel combination of resistors by their equivalent resistancesare very useful for simplifying many combinations of resistors, they arenot sufficient for the analysis of many simple circuits particularly thosecontaining more than one battery.
Let us see.
Kirchhoff’s laws
Two simple rules called Kirchhoff’s rules are applicable to any DC
circuit containing batteries and resistors connected in any way.
Junction Law
See figure 19.
We have seen that the current divides at P. The current drawn from the
battery is equal to the sum of the currents through the resistors. P is called
junction. The junction is a point where three or more conducting wires
meet.
At any junction point in a circuit where the current can divide,
the sum of the currents into the junction must equal the sum of
the currents leaving the junction. This means that there is no
accumulation of electric charges at any junction in a circuit.
From figure 22, we have
I1 + I4 + I6 = I5 + I2 + I3
This law is based on the conservation of charge.
Loop Law
The algebraic sum of the increases and decreases in potential difference
across various components of the circuit in a closed circuit loop must be
zero. This law is based on the conservation of energy.
Let us imagine in a circuit loop the potential difference between the
two points at the beginning of the loop has a certain value. As we move
around the circuit loop and measure the potential difference across each
fig-22I1
I2
I3
I4I5I6
Electric Current 248 X Classcomponent in the loop, the potential difference may decrease or increase
depending upon the nature of the element like a resistor or a battery. But
when we have completely traversed the circuit loop and arrive back at ourstarting point, the net change in the potential difference must be zero.
Thus, the algebraic sum of changes in potential differences is equal to
zero.
Let us apply Loop law to the circuit shown in
figure 23.
For the loop ACDBA,
-V
2 + I2R2 – I1R1+V1 = 0
For the loop EFDCE
-(I1+I2) R3 – I2R2 + V2 = 0
For the loop EFBAE
-(I1+I2) R3 – I1R1+V1 = 0
Example
Find electric current drawn(fig-E)from the battery of emf 12V .
Solution:
Let I = I1+I2 be the current drawn from emf 12V.
From the figure E. Using the loop law,
For the loop  DABCD,
-3 (I1+I2) + 12 – 2I1-5 = 0 ……….. (a)
For the loop DAFED,
-3 (I1+I2) + 12 – 4I2 = 0  ………. (b)
Solving the equation (a) & (b)
We get I1 = 0.5 A and I2 = 1.5 A
Total current drawn is then  I = 0.5 + 1.5 = 2A
–––––––––––––
•You might have heard the sentences like “this month we have consumed
100 units of current”. What does ‘unit’ mean?
•A bulb is marked 60W and 120V . What do these values indicate?
Let us see.
Electric power
The electric appliances that we use in our daily life like heater, cooker,
fan, and refrigerator etc. consume electric energy. Let us consider a
conductor of resistance ‘R’ through which an electric current ‘I’ passes.
fig-23I2I1
I1+I2V2V1R1
R2
R3AB
CD
E F
fig-EI1+I212VI1+I2
5V
I1I2I1 I2
2Ω3Ω
4Ω
A BC D E
F
Free distribution by A.P. Government 249We know that when current passes through conductor, heat energy is
generated.
Consider that a charge Q Coulomb passes through a
point A, moves to point B in the time interval ‘t’ seconds
as shown in figure 24. Let V be the potential differencebetween the points A and B. The work done by electric
field in time ‘t’ is given by
W = QV .........................(1)
This work is equal to the energy lost by the charge while passing
through the conductor.
•What is the energy lost by the charge in 1 see?It is equal to W/t.
From equation (1), we get
W/t = QV/t .........................(2)
In above equation Q/t represents the current (I) flowing through the
conductor and W/t represents the work done per second.
In lower classes you had studied that power is nothing but the rate of
doing work. Hence, W/t represents electric power (P).
Electric power P = VI .........................(3)
This equation can be used to calculate power consumption by any
electric device that is connected in a circuit.
According to the ohm’s law,V = IRWe can write equation (3) as
P = I
2
 R = V2/R
The equation P = VI can also be used to know the power that can be
extracted from a battery or any source. In such case we modify the equation
P = VI as P = ε I.
Where ε is the emf of the battery.
Le us consider an example to understand power consumption.
A bulb is marked 60W and 120V . This means that if this bulb is
connected to 120V source, it will able to convert 60J of electrical energy
into heat or light in one second.
From the marking of bulb we can measure the resistance of the bulb.
From the relation P = V2/R D R = V2/P
Substituting the values V and P in above equation, we get
R = 120 x 120/ 60 = 240 Ω
fig-24Fe
Direction of electric fieldA B
lQ
t=0tPotential difference V
Electric Current 250 X ClassThus, the bulbs marked as 60W and 120V will offer a resistance of
240 Ω to the flow current through it in normal condition.
If this bulb is connected to the 12V a battery, the consumption by the
bulb is given by
P = V2/R = 12 x 12/ 240 = 3/5 = 0.6 W
Since watt is a small unit of power, a bigger unit Kilowatt is generally
used to express power consumption.
1 KW = 1000 W = 1000 J/S
You might have seen the current bill that comes to your home every
month. In that bill, consumption of electricity is marked in units. What
does the unit represent?
The unit of electric power consumption is equal to 1 KWH (one Kilo
Watt Hour).
1 KWH = (1000 J/S) (60 x 60 S)
= 3600 x 1000 J
= 3.6 x 105 J
•What do you mean by overload?
•Why does it cause damage to electric appliances?
We frequently hear news about overload of current and damages caused
by this overload.
Electricity enters our homes through two wires called lines. These
line wires have low resistance and the potential difference between the
wires is usually about 240V . These two line wires run throughout thehousehold circuit, to which we connect various appliances such as fan, TV ,
refrigerator etc.
All the electric devices of our home are connected at different points
between these two wires. This means all the electric appliances are in
parallel connection. Hence, potential drop across each device is 240V . Ifwe know the value of resistance of the electric device, we can calculate
the current passing through it using the equation I = V/R. For example, the
current passing through a bulb with resistance 240 Ω is 1 A.
Based on the resistance of each electric device, it draws some current
from the supply. Total current drawn from the mains is equal to the sum ofthe currents passing through each device (Junction law).
If we add more devices to the household circuit the current drawn
from the mains also increases.
•What happens when this current increases greatly?
Free distribution by A.P. Government 251To answer this, observe the values noted on digital meters fixed at
your home. You will notice the following values on the meter.
Potential difference: 240 V
Current: 5 – 20AThis means the line wires that are entering the meter have a
potential difference of 240V . The minimum and maximum limit
of current that can be drawn from the mains is 5 – 20A. Thus, the
maximum current that we can draw from the mains is 20A. When
the current drawn from the mains is more than 20A. Overheatingoccurs and may cause a fire. This is called over loading. See figure
25. If we switch on devices, such as heater shown in figure 25, the
current drawn from the mains exceeds the max limit 20A.
•How can we prevent damage due to overloading?
To prevent damages due to overloading we connect an electric
fuse to the household circuit as shown in figure 25. In this
arrangement, the entire current from the mains must pass throughthe fuse. The fuse consists of a thin wire of low melting point.
When the current in the fuse exceeds 20A, the wire will heat up
and melt. The circuit then becomes open and prevents the flow ofcurrent into the household circuit. So all the electric devices are
saved from damage that could be caused by overload.
Thus we can save the house holding wiring and devices by using fuses.
Note: The value of overload current varies from the household currents
to factories.
240VFuseTVFridgeBulbFanHeater
20A6A8A2A4A
fig-25
Think and discuss
•What do you mean by short circuit?
•Why does a short circuit damage electric wiring and devices connected to
it?
Key words
Charge, Potential difference, Electric current, Multi-meter, Ohm’s law,
Resistance, Resistivity, Kirchhoff’s laws, Electric power, Electric energy.
Electric Current 252 X Class•Electric potential difference between points in an electric circuit is the work done to move a unit
positive charge from one point to another.
•Electric current is expressed as the amount of charge flowing through a particular cross section
0area in unit time.
•A multi-meter is an electronic measuring instrument that combines several measuring functions
(electric potential difference, electric current and electric resistance) in one unit.
•Ohms law: The current through a conductor element is proportional to the potential difference
applied between its ends, provided the temperature remains constant. Mathematically V=IR.
•Ohm’s law is valid for metal conductors at constant temperature. It is not applicable for gaseous
conductors and semiconductors.
•Resistance is the opposition that a substance offers to the motion of electrons.
•Resistance of a wire depends on the material of the wire, its length and its area of cross section
Rα l/A.
•The resistivity of a material is the resistance per unit length of a unit cross section of the material.
•Two or more resistors are said to be connected in series if the same current flows through them.
•Two or more resistors are said to be connected in parallel if the same potential difference existacross them.
•The junction law: At any junction point in a circuit where the current can divide, the sum of the
currents into the junction must equal the sum of the currents leaving the junction.
•The loop law:  The algebraic sum of the increases and decreases in potential difference across
various components of a closed circuit loop must be zero.
•Electric power is the product of potential difference and the current. SI unit of power is watt
(W).
•Electrical energy is the product of power and time. Units of electrical energy W-s and KWH.
1. Explain how electronflow causes electric current with Lorentz – Drude theory of electrons.(AS1)
2. How does a battery work? Explain. (AS1)
3. Write the difference between potential difference and emf. (AS1)
4. How can you verify that the resistance of a conductor is temperature dependent? (AS1)What we have learnt
Improve your learning

Free distribution by A.P. Government 2535. What do you mean by electric shock? Explain how it takes place. (AS1)
6. Derive R = ρl/A. (AS1)
7. How do you verify that resistance of a conductor is proportional to the length of the conductor
for constant cross section area and temperature?  (AS1)
8. Explain Kirchhoff’s laws with examples. (AS1)
9. What is a value of 1 KWH in Joules? (AS1)
10. Explain overloading of household circuit. (AS1)
11. Why do we use fuses in household circuits? (AS1)
12. Deduce the expression for the equivalent resistance of three resistors connected in series.
(AS1)
13. Deduce the expression for the equivalent resistance of three resistors connected in parallel.
(AS1)
14. Silver is a better conductor of electricity than copper. Why do we use copper wire for conduction
of electricity? (AS1)
15. Two bulbs have ratings 100 W, 220V and 60 W, 220 V . Which one has the greater resistance?
(AS1)
16. Why don’t we use series arrangement of electrical appliances like bulb, Television, fan and
others in domestic circuits? (AS1)
17. A wire of length 1m and radius 0.1 mm has a resistance of 100 Ω. Find the resistivity of the
material. (AS1)
18. Why do we consider tungsten as a suitable material for making the filament of a bulb? (AS2)
19. Are the head lights of a car connected in series or parallel? Why? (AS2)
20. Why should we connect electric appliances in parallel in a household circuit? What happens if
they are connected in series?
21. Suppose that you have three resistors each of value 30 Ω. How many resistors can you obtain
by various combinations of these three resistors? Draw diagrams in support of your predictions.
(AS2)
22. State Ohm’s law. Suggest an experiment to verify it and explain the procedure. (AS3)
23.  a. Take a battery and measure the potential difference. Make a circuit and measure the
potential difference when the battery is connected in the circuit. Is there any difference in
potential difference of battery? (AS4)
b. Measure the resistance of a bulb (filament) in open circuit with a multi-meter. Make a
circuit with elements such as bulb, battery of 12V and key in series. Close the key. Then
again measure the resistance of the same bulb (filament) for every 30 seconds. Record the
observations in a proper table. What can you conclude from the above results? (AS4)
Electric Current 254 X Class24. Draw a circuit diagram for a circuit in which two resistors A and B are connected in series with
a battery and a voltmeter is connected to measure the potential difference across the resistor A.
(AS5)
25. How can you appreciate the role of a small fuse in house wiring circuit in preventing damage to
various electrical appliances connected in the circuit?
(AS7)
26. In the figure Q-26 the potential at A is —————
—— when the potential at B is zero. (AS7)
27. Observe the circuit and answer the questions given
below. (AS7)
i. Are resistors 3 and 4 in series?
ii. Are resistors 1 and 2 in series?
iii. Is the battery in series with any resistor?
iv. What is the potential drop across the resistor 3?
v. What is the total emf in the circuit if the potential
drop across resistor 1 is 6V?
28. If the resistance of your body is 100000 Ω what would
be the current that flows in your body when you touch
the terminals of a 12V battery? (AS7)
29. A uniform wire of resistance 100 Ω is melted and recast into wire of length double that of the
original. What would be the resistance of the new wire formed?(AS7)
30. A house has 3 tube lights, two fans and a Television. Each tube light draws 40W. The fan draws
80W and the Television draws 60W. On the average, all the tube lights are kept on for five
hours, two fans for 12 hours and the television for five hours every day. Find the cost of electric
energy used in 30 days at the rate of Rs. 3.oo per Kwh. (AS7)
1. The kilowatt hour is the unit of...........................
2. A thick wire has a ........................... resistance than a thin wire.3. An unknown circuit draws a current of 2A from a 12V battery its equivalent resistance
is....................
4. The SI unit of potential difference is ......................fig-Q26
Fill in the blanks
5ΩJ1A
2VABV= 0
V1 1
23
4VB
V4=8V V2=14V+
–
–+
+
–+
–V3
G
fig-Q27
Free distribution by A.P. Government 2555. The SI unit of current is ..........................
6. Three resistors of values 2Ω, 4Ω, 6Ω are connected in series. The equivalent resistance of
combination of resistors is .....................
7. Three resistors of values 2Ω, 4Ω, 6Ω are connected in parallel. The equivalent resistance of
combination of resistors is .....................
8. The power delivered by a battery of emf, 10V is 10W. Then the current delivered by the
battery is ......................
1.  A uniform wire of resistance 50 Ω is cut into five equal parts. These parts are now connected
in parallel. Then the equivalent resistance of the combination is [      ]
a)  2 Ω b)  12 Ω
c) 250 Ω d) 6250  Ω
2. A charge is moved from a point A to a point B. The work done to move unit charge during this
process is called. [      ]
a)  potential at A b) potential at B
c)  potential difference between A and B d) current from A to B
3. Joule/ coulomb is the same as [     ]
a) 1 - watt b) 1 - voltc) 1- ampere d) 1 - ohm
4. The current in the wire depends [     ]
a) only on the potential difference applied b) only on the resistance of the wire
c) on both of them d) none of them
5. Consider the following statements. [     ]
A. In series connection, the same current flows through each element.B. In parallel connection, the same potential difference gets applied across each element.
a) both A and B are correct b) A is correct but B is wrong
c) A is wrong but B is correct d) both A and B are wrongMultiple choice questions
Electric Current 256 X ClassCan we apply Newton law’s to the motion of electrons?
Note: In this explanation, the random motion of electrons is neglected.
Let us consider a conductor of length l and cross sectional area A. Let
n be the density of electrons of a conductor.
The current passing through the conductor when the ends of the
conductor is maintained at a constant potential difference V is given by
I = nAevd....................... (a)
Where e is the charge of electron and vd is the drift velocity of
electrons.
Work done by the source to move electron between the ends (along
the conductor) is given by,
W = Ve ....................... (b)
We know that the work done by the electric force,W =F l ....................... (c)
Where F is the force applied by the electric field.From equations (b) and (c), We get Fl = Ve   D F = Ve/ l
From Newton’s second law, we know that F = ma is applicable to any
particle. Hence we have,
 ma = Ve/ l  D a = Ve/ lm ......................(d)
Assuming that the initial velocity (u) of electron is zero. Let v velocity
acquired by the electron in a time interval τ (interval between successive
collisions). Then u = 0 and t = τ
From equation v = u+at
 v = a τ = Ve τ/lm (from equation d)
Due to collisions with lattice ions, the motion of electrons is restricted.
Hence the average velocity of electron in time τ becomes its drift velocity.
Average velocity of electron v
d = (v+u)/2 = v/2
Substituting the value of v in above equation, we getAnnexure
Free distribution by A.P. Government 257Average velocity = Drift velocity, vd = Ve τ/2lm
Substituting the value of vd in equation (a) we get,
I = nAe(Ve τ/2lm)
I = V(ne2τ/2m)(A/ l)
I (2m/ne2τ)(l/A) = V ......................(e)
In the above equation, mass of the electron (m) and charge of the
electron (e) are constants because these values are characteristics of
the electron.
The electron density (n) of a metal conductor depends on its nature
so it is also constant for a particular conductor.
For a given conductor, the length ( l) and cross section area (A) are
also constants.  The value of τ depends on temperature of the conductor.
When the temperature increases the random motion of electrons
increases hence the value of τ decreases.
For a constant temperature of a conductor the value of τ becomes
constant.
Hence (2m/ne2τ) (l/A) becomes a constant for a particular
conductor at constant temperature. Let this value be R (called resistance
of a conductor). The we get
IR = V (from equation e) ...................(f)
This is what we call Ohm’s law.
Where R = (2m/ne2τ) (l/A) ..................(g)
In the above equation 2m/ne2τ is the characteristic value of a
conductor. The value of resistance R is different for different
geomentrical values for a particular conductor (material). Hence 2m/
ne2τ is taken as a constant independent of geomentrical values. Let it
be ρ. It is called specific resistance.
ρ = 2m/ne2τ
From equation (g) we get
R = ρl/A ..................(h)
Electromagnetism 258 X ClassIn the previous chapter on ‘Electricity’ you have learnt about the heating
effects of electric current. We use many electric appliances in our daily
life such as electric motor, electric generators, electric calling bells,
electric cranes etc.,
•How do they work?
•How do electromagnets work?
•Is there any relation between electricity and magnetism?
•Can we produce magnetism from electricity?In this chapter we will study electromagnetic effects. We also study
electric motors which involve magnetic effects of electric current and
electric generator which involves electric effects of moving magnets.
Hans Christian Oersted (1777 - 1851) was
one of the leading scientists of the 19th century, played a
crucial role in understanding electromagnetism . He gave
lectures which were quite popular among the public and
also learnt a lot during the tours. During one such lecture
in April 1820, Oersted carried out an experiment that
was never performed before. He placed a compass needle
underneath a wire and then turned on electric current.
The needle of compass showed deflection.
Oersted recognized the significance of what he had
just done. Earlier, it was believed that electricity and magnetism were two different
Electromagnetism12Chapter

Free distribution by A.P. Government 259Activity 1
Oersted experiment
Take a thermocole sheet and fix two thin wooden sticks of height 1cm
which have small slit at the top of their ends. Arrange a copper wire of 24
gauge so that it passes through these slits and make a circuit. The circuit
consists of a 3 (or 9) volt battery, key and copper wire which are connected
in series as shown in figure 1. Now, keep a magnetic compass below the
wire. Bring a bar magnet close to the compass.
•Does the needle get deflected by the bar magnet?
•Why does the needle get deflected by the
magnet?
Take the bar magnet far away from the circuit
and switch on the circuit. Look for changes in
the position of the needle.
•What do you notice?
•Is there any change in the position of the compass needle?
•Which force is responsible for the deflection of the compass needle?
•Does the current-carrying wire apply a force on the needle?
•What do we call this force? (Recall the idea of field forces in class 8,
chapter “Force”).
In order to understand the reasons for the deflection of the compass
needle with no bar magnet near it we need to understand the idea of
‘magnetic field’ and the influence of electric field on magnetic field.
Let us learn about it.unconnected sciences. Oersted had demonstrated that they were interconnected.Through this observation he showed that electricity and magnetism were related
phenomena. Some scientists, influenced by this experiment, continued to work inthe modern field of “electromagnetism”. Their research resulted in several new
scientific theories and various vital inventions like the dynamo and the electric
motor, with this a new technology prospered, leading to inventions such as radio,television and fiber optics.
The unit of magnetic field strength is named Oersted in his honour.
Oersted was made a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences
in 1822.
fig-1
Electromagnetism 260 X ClassMagnetic Field
We use the term field when a force gets applied on an object by another
object without there being any physical contact between them. You have
observed this already in activity 1. Let us call this field which is responsible
for deflection of the compass needle as ‘magnetic field’.
•How was this field produced?
•Can we observe the field of a bar magnet?Let us try.
Activity 2
Take a sheet of white paper and place it on the horizontal table. Place a
bar magnet in the middle of the sheet.  Place a magnetic compass near the
magnet. It settles to a certain direction. Use a pencil and put dots on the
sheet on either side of the needle. Remove the compass. Draw a small line
segment connecting the two dots. Draw an arrow on it from South Pole ofthe needle to North Pole of the needle. Repeat the same by placing the
compass needle at various positions on the paper. The compass needle
settles in different directions at different positions.
•Why does this happen?
Remove the bar magnet and place the magnetic compass on the paper.
It comes to rest along the north-south direction. Now place the bar magnet
in its previous place.
•Is there any change in the direction of the needle of the magnetic
compass? Why?
  The needle of the magnetic compass is affected by the bar magnet
without any physical contact. A force causes the needle to deflect and makes
it to come to rest in a certain direction.
•What is the nature of force that acts on the needle?The force which acts on the needle from a distance is due to the
magnetic field of the bar magnet.
In activity 2, you have already seen that the orientation of needle is
different at different places on paper. This gives us an idea that the magnetic
field has direction and it varies from one point to another.
When you changes the place of the compass near the bar magnet you
can observe that its orientation changes from point to point. Now take the
needle too places far away on the sheet and observe the orientation of the
compass needle in each case.
•What do you observe?
Free distribution by A.P. Government 261The compass needle shows almost the same direction along north and
south at places far from the magnet.
•What does it mean?
From these observations we conclude that the strength of the field
varies with distance from the bar magnet. Now hold the compass a little
above the table and at the top of the bar magnet. You can observe that field
exists in all directions around the bar magnet. Hence we can say that themagnetic field is three dimensional i.e., magnetic field surrounds its sourcesuch as bar magnet. From the above discussion we can generalize that:
A magnetic field exists in the region surrounding a bar magnet and is
characterized by strength and direction.
•How can we find the strength of the field and direction of the field?
You know that the direction of the field can be determined by using a
compass. Let us find out how to determine the strength of the field.
Activity 3
Place a white sheet of paper on a horizontal table. Place a compass in
the middle of it. Put two dots on either side of the compass needle. Take it
out. Draw a line connecting the dots which shows the North and South of
the earth. Now place the bar magnet on the line drawn in such a way that its
north pole points towards geographic north. Now place the compass at thenorth pole of the bar magnet. Put a dot at the north pole of the compass
needle. Now remove the compass and place it at the dot. It will point inother direction. Again put a dot at the north pole of the compass needle.Repeat the process till you reach the south pole of the bar magnet. Connectthe dots from ‘N’ of the bar magnet to ‘S’ of the bar magnet. You will get acurved line. Now select another point from the north pole of the barmagnet. Repeat the process for manypoints taken near the  north pole. You will
get different curves as shown in figure2.
•What are these curves?
Technically those curves are called
“magnetic field lines”. Field lines are
imaginary lines. These lines help us tounderstand the nature of the field. Sothese curved lines represent the field
fig-2: Magnetic field lines
Electromagnetism 262 X Classlines. If you place a compass at any point on the line, the needle comes to
rest along the tangent to the line. So we conclude that the tangent drawn to
the field line at a point gives the direction of the field.
•Are these field lines closed or open loops?
The field lines appear to be closed loops, but you can’t conclude that
lines are closed or open loops by looking at the picture of field lines because
we do not know about the alignment of lines that are passing through the
bar magnet. We will come to know about this point later in this chapter.
Observe the spacing between lines. In some places the field lines are
crowded (near the poles of a bar magnet) and in some places the fieldlines are spread apart (at long distances from the bar magnet). From this
picture we can conclude that the field is strong when lines are crowded
and field is weak when lines are spaced apart.
Thus, the field drawn is non uniform because the strength and direction
both change from point to point.
We may define the nature of the field with its characteristics such as
its strength and direction. The field is said to be non uniform when any oneof the characterstics of field i.e., strength or direction changes from point
to point, similarly the field is said to be uniform if both strength and
direction are constant throughout the field. Let us define the strength of auniform magnetic field.
•Can we give certain values to magnitude of the field at every point in
the magnetic field?
Consider a uniform magnetic field in space. Imagine a plane of certain
area ‘A’ placed perpendicular to the field at a certain point in the magnetic
field as shown in figure 3(a). You notice that a few field
lines pass through this plane. This number gives anestimation of strength of the field at that point.
The number of lines passing through the plane of
area ‘A’ perpendicular to the field is called magnetic
flux. It is denoted by ‘ Φ’.
Magnetic flux represents the number of lines
passing through the imagined plane in the field. Of course, flux depends
on the orientation of the plane in the field. But here we are concerned onlywith the perpendicular case. The S.I unit of magnetic flux is Weber. Now
strength of the field is easily defined using the idea of flux. If the imagined
plane is perpendicular to the field and has unit area, then the flux throughthis plane of unit area gives the strength of the field. This strength of the
fig-3(a)B
Area A
Free distribution by A.P. Government 263field is technically called magnetic flux density ( B). So, magnetic flux
density is defined as the magnetic flux passing through unit area taken
perpendicular to the field. B is also known as magnetic field induction.
Let the flux through the area ‘A’ be Φ.
•What is the flux through unit area perpendicular to the field?
It is equal to Φ/A. The ratio of magnetic flux passing through a plane
perpendicular to the field and the area of the plane is called the magnetic
flux density.
So magnetic flux density = magnetic flux/ area.
B = Φ/A. B Φ = BA
Units of magnetic flux density is Weber/(meter)2. It is also called
Tesla.
•Can we generalize the formula of flux for any
orientation of the plane taken in the field?
Let ‘θ’ be the angle between magnetic field (B)
and normal to the plane with area (A) as shown in
figure 3(b). The effective area  of the plane
perpendicular to the field is  A cos θ. Then magnetic
flux density is given by,
B = magnetic flux /effective area
(this formula is used when plane makes an angle with the field).
Then B = Φ/A cos θ
The flux through the plane, is given by
Φ = BA cos θ.
•What is the flux through the plane taken parallel to the field?
•What is the use of introducing the ideas of magnetic flux and magnetic
flux density?
Later in this chapter, you will see how these ideas are used.
•Are there any sources of magnetic field other than magnets?
•Do you know how old electric calling bells work?Let us see
Magnetic field due to currents
In activity 1 we observed that the compass needle is deflected when
current flows through the circuit. This observation helps us to conclude
that, “Current carrying wire produces magnetic field.”
Let us discuss about the magnetic fields produced by a current carrying
wire.
fig-3(b)Area A cos θ Area Aθ
B
Electromagnetism 264 X Class(i) Magnetic field due to straight wire carrying current
Activity 4
Take a wooden plank and make a hole as
shown in figure 4(a). Place this plank on the
table. Now place a retort stand on the plank as
shown in figure 4(a). Pass 24 gauge copper wire
through hole of the plank and rubber knob ofthe retort stand in such a way that the wire be
arranged in a vertical position and not touch the
stand. Connect the two ends of the wire to a
battery via switch. Place 6 to 10 compass
needles in a circular path around the hole so that
its centre coincides with the hole. Use 3 (or 9)volt battery in the circuit. Switch on.  Current
flows through the wire.
•How do the directions of the compass needles change?
You may notice that they are directed as tangents to the
circle.•What is the shape of the magnetic field line around wire?
It must be a circular line. So we conclude that magnetic
field lines are closed lines. The magnetic field lines due to
straight wire carrying the current is shown in figures 4(b) and
4(c). This can be verified by sprinkling iron filings around the
wire when current flows in the wire.
•What is the direction of magnetic field induction at any point
on the field line?
If the current flow is vertically upwards (out of the page),
the field lines are in anticlockwise direction, as shown in figure
4(b). If current flows into the page, in downward direction, the
field lines are in clockwise direction as shown in figure 4(c).How do we determine the direction of field lines? It can beeasily determined with right hand thumb rule. If you grab the
current carrying wire with your right hand in such way that thumb
is in the direction of current, then the curled fingers show thedirection of the magnetic field as shown in figure 4(d).
fig-4(a)Table
Battery
SwitchCompass
needleStand
Conducting
wire
fig-4(b)Current out of the page
Current into the page
fig-4(c)
BI
fig-4(d)Wooden
plank
Free distribution by A.P. Government 265(ii) Magnetic field due to circular coil
Activity 5
Take a thin wooden plank covered with white paper
and make two holes on its surface as shown in figure
5(a). Pass insulated copper wire (24 gauge) through the
holes and wind the wire 4 to 5 times through holes such
that it looks like a coil (figure 5(a)). The ends of the
wire are connected to terminals of the battery through a
switch. Now switch on the circuit. Place a compass
needle on the plank at the centre of the coil. Put dots on either side of the
compass. Again place compass at one of the dots, put other dot further. Do
the same till you reach the edge of the plank. Now repeat this for the other
side of the coil from the centre. Then draw a line joining the dots, you will
get a field line of the circular coil. Do the same for the other points taken
in between the holes. Draw corresponding lines. You will get field lines of
the circular coil.
•Can you tell the direction of the magnetic field of the coil?This could be answered from the orientation of the compass needle.
You can observe this when the compass needle is kept at the centre of the
coil. The direction in which the compass needle comes to rest indicates
the direction of the field due to the coil. Thus the direction of the field is
perpendicular to the plane of the coil.
•Why does the compass needle point in the direction of field?Place the compass in front of one of the faces of the coil and observe
the orientation of the compass needle. Note the pole of the needle that
faces the coil. We know that south pole is attracted to the north pole. The
needle is oriented in such a way that its south pole points
towards the north pole of the coil. So we can say that the
direction of magnetic field, due to coil, points towards
you when the current in the coil is in anticlockwise
direction. Verify this in your experiment (do not touch
the wires of the coil). When the current in the coil is in
clock-wise direction, the direction of magnetic field due
to the coil points away from you. The direction of the field due to coil or
solenoid is determined by using right hand rule, which states that,
“When you curl your right hand fingers in the direction of current,
thumb gives the direction of magnetic field.”
Observe the direction of magnetic field in figure 5(b).
fig-5(a)To current
supply
circuit
fig-5(b)SB
N
rIB
rII
Electromagnetism 266 X Class(iii) Magnetic field due to solenoid
Activity 6
Take a wooden plank covered with white paper.
Make equidistant holes on its surface as shown in
figure 6(a). Pass copper wire through the holes as
shown in figure 6(a). This forms a coil. Join the ends
of the coil to a battery through a switch. Switch onthe circuit. Current passes through the coil. Now
sprinkle iron filings on the surface of the plank around
the coil. Give a small jerk to it. An orderly pattern of
iron filings is seen on the paper.
• How do they adjust in such an orderly pattern?
This long coil is called solenoid. A solenoid is a
long wire wound in a close packed helix. The field
of solenoid is shown in the figure 6(b). The magnetic
field lines set up by solenoid resemble those of a
bar magnet indicating that a solenoid behaves like abar magnet. The direction of the field due to solenoid
is determined by using right hand rule. One end of the solenoid behaveslike a north pole and other behaves like a south pole. The field lines outsidethe solenoid are continuous with those inside. Outside the solenoid the
direction of the field lines is from north to south while inside the direction
is from south to north. Thus the magnetic field lines are closed loops.This is so for the bar magnet too!
We have seen that current carrying wires produce magnetic field. So,
electric charges in motion produce magnetic fields.
•What happens when a current carrying wire is kept in a magnetic field?Let us see.
Magnetic Force On Moving Charge And Current Carrying Wire
Activity 7
Stand near the TV screen. Switch on the TV . (The old CRT type TV)
•Do you feel any sensation on your skin?
•What could be the reason for that?
Take a bar magnet and bring it near the TV screen.  What do you observe?
You can observe that the picture on the screen is distorted.
•Why does the picture get distorted?
fig-6(a)To current
supply circuit
fig-6(b)N SI I
Free distribution by A.P. Government 267•Is the motion of electrons reaching the screen affected by the magnetic
field of the bar magnet?
Move the bar magnet away from the screen. Now you will get a clear
picture. Repeat this to confirm that the motion of electrons is affected by
the field produced by the bar magnet. This must be due to the fact that the
magnetic field exerts a force on the moving charges. This force is called
magnetic force.
•Can we calculate the force experienced by a charge
moving in a magnetic field?
Let a charge ‘q’ move with a velocity ‘v’ perpendicular
to the magnetic field ‘B’ as shown in figure 7. The value of
magnetic force on the moving charge can be found
experimentally and it is given by,
F = q v B
Magnetic force on the charge is the product of three
quantities charge, speed and magnetic flux density. The equation formagnetic force acting on a charge ‘q’ is F = q v B and holds well only whenthe direction of velocity of charged particle ‘v’ is perpendicular to the
direction of the magnetic field ‘B’.
•Can we generalize the equation for magnetic force on charge when
there is an angle ‘ θ’ between the directions of field B and velocity v?
It is experimentally proved that when there is an angle between direction of
field and velocity, the magnetic force experienced by the charge is given by,
F = q v B sin θ.
•What is the magnetic force on the charge moving parallel to a magnetic
field?
When charge moves parallel to the magnetic field (along the magnetic
field or against the field) the value of θ becomes zero. In the above
equations θ is 00 so that sin θ = 0.
Thus the charge experiences no force when it is moving parallel to the
magnetic field (along field direction or against field direction).
•What is the direction of magnetic force acting on a moving charge?
We have an easy method to find out the direction of magnetic force
acting on a charge moving in a magnetic field. Keep your right hand fingers
along the direction of velocity of moving charge and next curl your fingerstowards the direction of magnetic field then the thumb gives the direction
of magnetic force as shown in figure 8(a). This rule is applied for any case
fig-7qvX indicates the direction of B
and it is into the page
Electromagnetism 268 X Classof angle between directions of velocity and field. The direction
of magnetic force is always perpendicular to the direction of
both velocity and magnetic field.
Generally right hand rule is used when velocity and field
are perpendicular to each other. This law states that, “If the
fore-finger points towards the direction of velocity of charge
or current, middle finger points to the direction of field (B)
then thumb gives direction of force when the three fingers
are stretched in such a way that they are perpendicular to each
other as shown in figure 8(b).”
This rule is applicable to positive charge.
•What is the direction of force acting on a negative charge
moving in a field?
First find the direction of force acting on a positive charge.
Next reverse its direction. This new direction is the direction
of force acting on the negative charge.
Let us see an example of force acting on a charged particle.
Example 1
A charged particle ‘q’ is moving with a speed ‘v’
perpendicular to the magnetic field of induction B. Find the radius of the
path and time period of the particle.
Solution: Let us assume that the field is directed into the page as shown
in figure E-1. Then  the force experienced by the particle is F = q v B. We
know that this force is always directed perpendicular to velocity. Hence
the particle moves along a circular path and the magnetic force on a charged
particle acts like a centripetal force.
Let r be the radius of the circular path.
We know that centripetal force = mv2 / r
                                           q v B = mv2 / r
Solving this equation, we get; r = mv / Bq
Time period of the particle; T = 2 πr / v
Substituting r in above equation, we get
T = 2 πm / Bq
–––––––––––––––––
•What happens when a current carrying wire is
placed in a magnetic field?
F
B
V
fig-8(a)
fig-8(b):Right hand
rule for positive
chargev or I
B out of
paperF
fig-E-1B v
v
v
vvvvv
F
FFFFR
F
Free distribution by A.P. Government 269Electric current is charges in motion. We know that each charge
experiences a magnetic force. Thus the current carrying wire  (constituting
collection of charges in motion) experiences magnetic force when it iskept in a magnetic field.
•Can you determine the magnetic force on a current carrying wire which
is placed along a magnetic field?
We know that each charge experiences no magnetic force because
they are moving parallel to the direction of field along the field. So the
force acting on wire is zero when it is kept along a magnetic field.
Let us find the magnetic force on a straight wire carrying current which
is kept perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field ‘B’. This ‘B’ is directed
into the page. It is represented by ‘x’ as shown in the figure 9. Let the fieldbe confined to the length L. So only the part of the wire of the length ‘L’ is
inside the magnetic field. Remaining wire is outside the magnetic field.
We know that the electric current means charges in motion hence theymove with a certain velocity called drift velocity ‘v’.
The magnetic force on a single charge is given by,
F
0 = q v B
Let total charge inside the magnetic field be Q. So magnetic force on
the current carrying wire is given by
F = Q v B ..................(1)
The time taken by the charge (Q) to cross the field be
t  = L / v D v = L/t ..................(2)
substituting this in equation 1, we get,
F = Q (L/t) B D F = (Q / t) LB ..................(3)
We know that Q / t  is equal to the electric current in
the wire,
I = Q / t
Substituting ‘I’ in the equation 3, we get
F = ILB .................(4)
Note: This equation holds well only when direction of
electric current is perpendicular to magnetic field.
In figure 9, you can observe the bending in the wire due to the force
applied on it.
•What is the force on the wire if its length makes an angle ‘ θ’ with the
magnetic field?
fig-9BB L
I = 0 IAssume that the ends of
the wire is connected to
the terminals of the battery
Electromagnetism 270 X Class
Let ‘θ’ be the angle between direction of current and magnetic field,
then the force acting on the current carrying wire is given by
F = ILB sin θ (at any angle) ...................(5)
•How could you find its direction?
You can use right hand rule to find out the direction of force on the
current carrying wire.
Let us see the result of force applied on a current carrying wire by an
experiment.
Activity 8
Take a wooden plank. Fix two long wooden sticks on it. These wooden
sticks are split at their top ends.
A copper wire is passed through these splits and the ends of the wire
are connected to battery of 3 volt, through a switch. Close the switch to
make the circuit. Current passes through the wire. Now bring a horseshoemagnet near the copper wire as shown in figure 10.
•What happens to the wire?
•In which way does it deflect?
Use the right thumb rule to find the
direction of force.
•Is the direction of deflection observed
experimentally same as that of the
theoretically expected one?
Change polarities of the horse shoe
magnet. Again observe the deflection.Repeat this by changing the direction of
current in the circuit.
•Does the right hand rule give the explanation for the direction ofmagnetic force exerted by magnetic field on the wire?
Right hand rule helps you to find the direction of magnetic force exerted
by the magnetic field on current carrying wire. It does not help you explain
the reason for deflection of wire.
•Can you give a reason for it?
Imagine a situation where there is no current in the wire. Then there
exists only magnetic field due to external source (horse shoe magnet).
When there is a current in the wire, it also produces a magnetic field.These fields overlap and give non- uniform field. Let us see this clearly
with diagrams.fig-10FNSI
Free distribution by A.P. Government 271The field in between north and south pole of horse shoe magnet is
shown in the figure 11 (a). Let us imagine a wire passing perpendicular to
the paper. Let the current pass through it (into the page). It produces a
magnetic field as shown in figure 11(b). Now let us try to sketch the resultant
field by observing the field lines. We can see that the direction of the fieldlines due to the wire in upper part (of circular lines) coincides with the
direction of the field lines of horse shoe magnet. The direction of field
lines by wire in lower part (of circular lines) is opposite to the direction
of the field lines of horse shoe magnet. So that the net field in upper part
is strong and in lower part it is weak. Hence a non-uniform field is created
around the wire. This non uniform field is shown in figure 11 (c). Therefore
the wire tries to move to the weaker field region.
•Does this deflection fit with the direction of magnetic force found by
right hand rule?
•What happens when a current carrying coil is placed in a uniform
magnetic field?
•Can we use this knowledge to construct an electric motor?
Let us try to answer.
Electric Motor
To understand the working of an electric motor we need
to understand the behaviour of a current carrying coil kept in a
uniform magnetic field.
Consider a rectangular coil kept in a uniform magnetic
field as shown in figure 12(a). Switch on the circuit so that the
current flows through the rectangular coil. The direction of
current in the coil is shown in figure 12(a).
•What is the angle made by AB and CD with magnetic field?
You will notice that they are always at right angles to the
magnetic field.
B
fig-11(a): Field lines due to
horseshoe magnet between its polesfig-11(b): Current
into the pagefig-11(c)
fig-12(a)Magnetic field (B)AB
C
D
Electromagnetism 272 X Class•Can you draw the direction of magnetic force on sides AB and CD?
Apply right hand rule to get the direction of magnetic force. At AB, the
magnetic force acts inward perpendicular to field of the magnet and on
CD, it acts outward.
See the figure 12(b). This figure is drawn showing top
view. The force on the sides BC and DA varies because they
make different angles at different positions of the coil in
the field.
•  What are the directions of forces on BC and DA?
At BC, magnetic force pulls the coil up and at DA
magnetic force pulls it down.
•  What is the net force on the rectangular coil?
The force on AB is equal and opposite to the force on CD due to external
magnetic field because they carry equal currents in the opposite direction.
Sum of these forces is zero; similarly the sum of the forces on sides BC
and DA is also zero for the same reason. So, net force on the coil is zero.
But there is rotation of the coil. How is it possible?
•Why does the coil rotate?
Let us consider opening a cap of the bottle as an example
where two equal and opposite forces act on the cap. Two forces
equal in magnitude but opposite in direction must act on the
either side of cap of the bottle as shown in figure 12 (c). These
forces bring the cap into rotation. Similarly the rectangular coil
comes into rotation in clockwise direction because of equal
and opposite pair of forces acting on the two sides of the coil.
•What happens to the rotation of the coil if the direction of current inthe coil remains unchanged?
If the direction of current in the coil is unchanged, it rotates up to a
vertical position then due to its inertia it rotates further in clockwise
direction. But now the sides of the coil experience forces which are in the
opposite direction to the previous case. Hence these forces try to rotate it
in anti clockwise direction. As a result, this coil comes to halt and rotates
in anti clock wise direction, this will go on if the direction of current
remains unchanged.
•How could you make the coil rotate continuously?If the direction of current in the coil, after the first half rotation, is
reversed, the coil will continue to rotate in the same direction. Thus if the
direction of current through the coil is reversed every half rotation, the
coil will rotate continuously in one and the same direction.
F(on AB)
F(on CD)B
CB
fig-12(b)
fig-12(c)F
F
Free distribution by A.P. Government 273•How can we achieve this?
To achieve this, brushes B1 and B2 are used,
as shown in figure 12 (d). These brushes are
connected to the battery. The ends of the coil
are connected to slip rings C1 and C2, which
rotate along with the coil. Initially C1 is in
contact with B1 and C2 is in contact with B2.
After half rotation, the brushes come intocontact with the other slip rings in such a way
that the direction of current through the coil is
reversed. This happens every half rotation. Thusthe direction of rotation of the coil remains the
same.  This is the principle used in “electric
motor.”
In electric motors, electrical energy is converted into mechanical
energy.
We have learned that a current carrying coil rotates when it is kept in
a uniform magnetic field.
•What happens when a coil without current is made to rotate in magnetic
field?
•How is current produced?
Electromagnetic induction - Faraday’s law
Activity 9
Take a wooden base as shown in figure 13(a). Fix a soft iron cylinder
on the wooden base vertically. Wind copper wire around the soft iron as
shown in figure 13(a). Now take a metal ring which is slightly greater in
radius than the radius of the soft iron cylinder and insert it through the
soft iron cylinder on the wooden base. Connect the ends of the coil
to an AC source and switch on the current.
•     What do you notice?
You notice that the metal ring is levitated on the coil.
Switch off the current, the ring will jump into the air very
dramatically. Remove the AC supply and connect a DC supply. Observe
what happens.
•Why is there a difference in behaviour in these two cases?
•What force supports the ring against gravity when it is being
levitated?
fig-12(d)+-BrushesB1B2C2C1N
SBC
DAAnticlockwise
rotation
Split-ring
Communicator
Current
(reverses at
half turn)
fig-13(a)
Electromagnetism 274 X Class•    Could the ring be levitated if DC is used?
The metal ring levitates when AC is used, therefore the net
force on it should be zero according to Newton’s second law. The
free body diagram of metal ring is shown in figure 13 (b). Weight
(w) acts down. To balance it, a force (F) equal in magnitude andopposite in direction should act as shown in figure 13 (b).
• What is this unknown force acting on the metal ring?
In this activity AC is used. AC changes both its magnitude and
direction in regular time intervals. We know that the current through the
coil, produces a magnetic field so that one end of the coil behaves like
north pole and other end behaves like south pole for a certain time interval.
For the next interval, coil changes its polarities.Hence we can say that coil undergoes changes inits poles in the same intervals of time. Thelevitation of metal ring is possible only when the
metal ring behaves like a magnet and should change
its polarities in the same time intervals but in asense opposite to that of the solenoid (coil) asshown in figure 13(c). Assume that the currentflows in an clockwise direction in the solenoid asviewed from the top. Then the upper end becomes
a south pole. An upward force is applied on the
ring only when the upper side of the ring becomes a north pole (i.e. south
pole of the ring faces towards the south pole of solenoid). It is only possiblewhen there exists a anticlockwise current (viewed from the top) in the
ring. After certain intervals, solenoid changes its polarities, so that thering should also change its polarities in the same intervals. This is the
reason why the metal ring is levitated.
•What is responsible for the current in the metal ring?
AC is not a constant current. So that, the magnetic induction changes
in both magnitude and direction in the solenoid and in the ring.
Here the area of the metal ring is constant. But the field through the
metal ring changes so that flux linked with the metal ring changes.•If DC is used, the metal ring lifts up and falls down immediately. Why?
The flux linked with metal ring is zero when no current flows through
the solenoid. When the current is allowed to flow through the solenoid, it
behaves like bar magnet. So the flux is linked to the metal ring when the
fig-13(b)F
W
Direction of
induced emfFalling ring
fig-13(c)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 275switch is on. At that instant there is a change in flux linked with ring. Hence
the ring rises up. There after, there is no change in flux linked with coil,
hence it falls down. If the switch is off, the metal ring again lifts up andfalls down. In this case also, there is a change in flux linked with ring when
the switch is off.
•What could you conclude from the above analysis?
Let us  understand the results of activity 9 by the
following hypothetical activity.
Connect the terminals of a coil to a sensitive
ammeter or a galvanometer as shown in the figure-14.
Normally, we would not expect any deflections of needle
in the galvanometer because there is to be no
electromotive force in this circuit. Now if we push a barmagnet towards the coil, with its north pole facing the
coil, a remarkable thing happens. While the magnet is moving towards the
coil, the needle in galvanometer deflects, showing that a current has beenset up in the coil, the galvanometer does not deflect if the magnet is at
rest. If the magnet is moved away from the coil, the needle in the
galvanometer again deflects, but in the opposite direction, which meansthat a current is set up in the coil in the opposite direction.
If we use the end of south pole of a magnet instead of north pole in the
above activity, the experiment works just as described but the deflectionsare exactly reversed.
Further experimentation enables us to understand that the relative
motion of the magnet and coil set up a current in the coil. It makes no
difference whether the magnet is moved towards the coil or the coil towards
the magnet.
“Whenever there is a continuous change of magnetic flux linked with
a closed coil, a current is generated in the coil.”
This is one form of Faraday’s law.
The current generated is called induced current and is set up by an
induced electromotive force (induced EMF). This phenomenon of getting
induced current is called electromagnetic induction.
Faraday observed that the changes in the magnetic flux through the
coil are responsible for the generation of current in the coil. He also
observed that the rapid changes in flux through coil generate greater induced
current or induced EMF. After observing this important factor, he proposed
a law of electromagnetic induction, which is as follow,
“The induced EMF generated in a closed loop is equal to the rate of
change of magnetic flux passing through it.”
fig-14NS
GN
Electromagnetism 276 X ClassIn mathematical form, we can write this as
Induced EMF = change in flux/ time
ε = ΔΦ/Δt .....................(6)
The equation is called Faraday’s law of induction where Φ (phi) is the
flux linked with coil. Let Φ0 be the flux linked with single turn. If there are
N turns in the coil, the flux linked with the coil is N Φ0.
  Φ = N Φ0......................(7)
So far we have not specified the direction of the induced EMF or
induced current. In the previous example, we have observed that an induced
current is set up in the loop.
•What is its direction?
•Can you apply conservation of energy for electromagnetic induction?
When we push the bar magnet towards the coils, current is generated,
in other word electromagnetic induction takes place and mechanical energy
is converted into electrical energy.
Let us discuss it in detail.
We know that when a bar magnet is pushed towards a coil with its north
pole facing the coil an induced current is set up in the coil. Let the direction
of current in the coil be in clockwise direction with respect to north pole
of the bar magnet. Then this current carrying loop behaves like a magnet,
with its south pole facing the north pole of bar magnet. In such a case, thebar magnet attracts the coil. Then it gains kinetic energy. This is
contradictory to conservation of energy. So our assumed clockwise
direction of induced current is wrong. Hence the
correct direction of induced current has to be in
anticlockwise direction with respect to north pole
of the bar magnet. In such a case, the north pole of
the coil faces the north pole of the bar magnet as
shown in figure 15. Then north pole of bar magnet
is repelled by the north pole of the coil. Hence we
need to do work to overcome this force. This work
done on the magnet is converted into electrical energy in the coil. In this
way conservation of energy takes place in electromagnetic induction.
Let us see a case where the bar magnet is pulled away from the coil,
with north pole facing the coil. In such case, the coil opposes the motionof bar magnet to balance the conversion of mechanical energy into electric
energy. This happens only when the north pole of the magnet faces the
south pole of the coil.
fig-15N
N
N
N
NS
S
SS
SN S
Free distribution by A.P. Government 277•Can you guess what could be the direction of induced current in the
coil in such case?
Invariably the direction of induced current in the coil must be in anti
clock wise direction. In simple terms, when flux increases through coil,
the coil opposes the increase in the flux and when flux decreases throughcoil, it opposes the decrease in the flux.
This is Lenz’s law.
Lenz’s law states that “the induced current will appear in such a direction
that it opposes the changes in the flux in the coil.”•Could we get Faraday’s law of induction from conservation of energy?
Let us see.
Let us arrange an apparatus as shown in figure 16. It consists of a pair
of parallel bare conductors which are spaced l meters apart in uniform
magnetic field of ‘B’. We can hold another bare conductor in such a way
that it is in contact with the two parallel wires(see figure-16). A galvanometer is connected to the ends
of parallel conductors to
complete an electric circuit.Now if the cross wire (cross
conductor) placed across
parallel conductors is moved tothe left, galvanometer needle will
deflect in one direction.
If this cross wire is moved
to the right, its needle deflects
in a direction opposite to theprevious deflection. Suppose
that the  crosswire is moved to
the left to a distance of ‘s’ meters in a time of ‘ Δ t’. Then the reading of
galvanometer gives us the amount of current that flows in the circuit. A
current will be set up in the circuit only when there is an EMF in the circuit.
Let this EMF be ‘ ε’. The principle of conservation of energy tells us that
this electric energy (associated with flow of current) must come from the
work that we have done in moving the crosswire. If we ignore friction
everywhere, in the arrangement, the work done by this applied force = Fs.It is evident that there is a current of ‘I’ amperes flowing through the length
of l meters of the cross wire, and the cross wire is in a magnetic field.
With this information,fig-16
N s
S
GalvanometerFlow of induced
currentDistance Flux
density B
Cross
wirel
Parallel
conductors
Electromagnetism 278 X Class•Can you derive an expression for the force applied on crosswire by
the field B?
We know that it is equal to BI l, from equation-4 of previous discussion
(see page 269)
i.e.,  F = BI l .............................(8)
This force must oppose the applied force. The direction of applied
force determines the direction of current through the cross wire. Here we
are doing positive work. The work done by us in moving the cross wire
converts into electric energy. So the work done is given by,
W = Fs =BI ls .............................(9)    (using equation-8)
When we put the cross wire across parallel conductors it makes a
complete electrical circuit which encloses a certain amount of magneticflux. Now as we move the cross wire to the left, the area of the loop (formedby the parallel conductors and cross wire) decreases and the flux through
the loop also decreases. The decrease in flux is given by,
ΔΦ = Bls .............................(10)
Here B is perpendicular to the area ( ls). From equations 9 and 10
W = (ΔΦ) Ι
Let us divide both sides of this equation by Δt
W/Δ t = I ( ΔΦ/ Δt) .............................(11)
Electric power, P = I ΔΦ/ Δt
We know that electric power is the product of current and emf or
voltage. ε=ΔΦ /Δt is obviously equal to induced EMF.
Electric power, P = εΙ   .............................(12)
Thus the electric power generated in the circuit is equal to product of
induced EMF and the current. Thus the mechanical energy utilised to move
the cross wire in one second is converted into electric power ( ΔΦ/Δt) I.
This is nothing but conservation of energy.
Dividing equation (9) by Δt, we have
W/Δt = Fs/ Δt =BI ls/Δt ..................(13)
Here s/ Δt gives the speed of the cross wire, let it be taken as v. Then
we get
Electric power P = W/ Δ t = Fv = BI lv ......(14)
Power is also given as force times velocity. From equations (12) and
(14), we get
W/Δ t = εI
       εI = BI lvl
Free distribution by A.P. Government 279We get,
     ε = B lv
This is called motional EMF.  The above equation is not Faraday’s law
of induction because it is not related to the loop. It is useful when a
conductor moves in a uniform magnetic field.
Let us see a few examples on induced emf.
Example 2
The magnetic flux inside a coil of 400 turns
changes for each single turn with time as shown in
figure
Determine the maximum induced emf generated
in the coil. Is there any change in induced EMF from t = 0.1 second to 0.3
second?
Solution: From the given graph, the increase in magnetic flux through
one turn of coil in 0.1 second is 0.001 Wb. According to Faraday’s law,
the maximum induced emf generated in the coil is given by,
ε   = N Δ Φ /Δt
Substituting the values, we get
ε = 400(0.001/0.1) = 4V
From graph, there is no change in magnetic flux through coil from t =
0.1s to 0.3s hence no emf is generated.
Example 3
Find the length of the conductor which is moving with a speed of 10
m/s in the direction perpendicular to the direction of magnetic field of
induction0.8T, if it induces an emf of 8V between the ends of the conductor.
Solution:  Given that B = 0.8T, v = 10 m/s and ε = 8V .
Using ε = Blv
          8 = 0.8( l)(10)
           l (length of the conductor) = 1m
–––––––––––––––––
Let us see some applications of Faraday’s law of electromagnetic
induction.
Electromagnetic induction is all around us.
•You might have seen that, during security check, people are made to
walk through a large upright coil of wire which produces a weak AC
(alternating) magnetic field. If we are carrying any significant quantities
of iron, the magnetic flux linked with the large coil changes and the
induced current generated in coil triggers an alarm.
fig-E-2
Electromagnetism 280 X Class•The tape recorder which we use to listen to songs (or) record voices
works on the principle of electromagnetic induction. It consists of a
piece of plastic tape coated with iron oxide and is magnetised more insome parts than in others. When the tape is moved past as a small coil
of wire (head of the tape recorder), the magnetic field produced by the
tape changes, which leads to generation of current in the small coil of
wire.
•How could we use the principle of electromagnetic induction in thecase of using ATM card when its magnetic strip is swiped through a
scanner? Discuss with your friends and your teacher.
•An induction stove works on the principle of electromagneticinduction. A metal coil is kept just beneath the cooling surface. It carries
alternating current (AC) so that AC produces an alternating magneticfield. When you keep a metal pan with water on it, the varying magnetic
field beneath it crosses the bottom surface of the pan and an EMF is
induced in it. Because the pan is metal the induced EMF generates aninduced current in it. Since the pan has a finite resistance, the flow
induced current in it produces heat in it and this heat is conducted to
the water. That’s why we call this stove as induction stove.
Have you ever thought, from where do we get electrical energy?
Let us learn about it.
Electric Generator and Alternating - Direct Currents
•What happens when a coil is
continuously rotated in a uniform
magnetic field?
•Does it help us to generate electric
current?
Let us see:Consider a rectangular coil. Let it be
held between the poles of Curve- shaped
permanent magnet as shown in figure
17(a). As the coil rotates, the magnetic
flux passing through the coil changes.According to the law of electro magnetic
induction an induced current is generated
in the coil.
•Is the direction of current induced in
the coil constant? Does it change?
Slip rings
BrushesNSA
BRotation
fig-17(a):
Free distribution by A.P. Government 2811. Consider initially the coil, positioned in such a way that magnetic
flux passes through it. When the coil is at rest in vertical position, with
side (A) of coil at top position and side (B) at bottom position, no currentwill be induced in it. Thus current in the coil is zero at this position.
2. When the coil is rotated in clockwise direction, current will be
induced in it and it  flows from A to B. During the first quarter of rotation,
the current increases from zero to a maximum and reaches peak value
when the coil is in
horizontal position.
3. If we continue the
rotation of coil, current
decreases during the
second quarter of therotation and once again
becomes zero when coil
comes to vertical positionwith side B at top (A) at
bottom position. During
the second part of therotation, current gener-
ated follows the same
pattern as that in the firsthalf except that the
direction of current is reversed. (see figure-17(b) )
•Can you guess the reason for variation of current from zero to maximum
and vice-versa during the rotation of coil?
•Can we make use of this current? If so, how?
Let us find out.As shown in figure17(a) the ends of the coil are connected to two slip
rings. Two carbon brushes arranged in such a way that they press the slip
rings to obtain current from the coil. When these brushes are connected
to external devices like TV , radio, we can make them work with current
supplied from ends of carbon brushes.
The current obtained by this process changes its direction alternatively
for each half cycle as shown in figure 17(b).
This current is called alternating current (AC) in which, the direction
of charge flow reverses periodically. So AC possesses certain frequency.The generator that we discussed here is called AC generator.
emf generated in the coilOne complete cycle
Zero emf
coil
verticalMaximum
emf, coil
horizontalZero
emfMaximum
reversed
emfZero
emfPosition of
coil with
respect to
direction of
magnetic fluxNo. of
revolutions
0 1/4 1/2 1 3/4
fig-17(b)
Electromagnetism 282 X ClassThese AC - EMF and AC are expressed in terms
of rms values.
Let I0 and V0 be the peak values of AC and
AC - EMF.
Irms = I0/
 and Vrms = V0/
• How can we get DC current using a generator?
• What changes do we need to make in an AC
generator to be converted into a DC generator?
Let us find out.
If two half slip rings are connected to ends
of the coil as shown in figure 17(c), the AC
generator works as DC generator to produceDC current.
Let us see how it works.
When the coil is in the vertical position the induced current generated
during the first half rotation, rises from zero to maximum and then falls to
zero again. As the coil movesfurther from this position,the ends of the coil go to
other slip rings. Hence
during the second halfrotation, the current is
reversed in the coil itself,  the
current generated in thesecond half rotation of the
coil is identical with that
during the first half of directcurrent (DC) as shown in
figure 17(d)for one
revolution.
In generators, mechanical energy is converted into the electrical
energy.
.
Commutator
BrushNSRotation
RA
B
fig-17(c)
emf generated coil
Zero emf Maximum
emfZero
emfMaximum
emfZero
emfPosition of
coil and
commutator
with
respect to
direction
of
magnetic
fluxNo. of
revolutions
0 1/4 1/2 1 3/4 11/4
fig-17(d)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 283Key words
Magnetic flux, Magnetic flux density, Electric motor, Slip rings,
Induced current, Induced EMF , Electric generator, DC and
AC currents, rms values
•Magnetic flux density (B) is defined as the ratio of flux passing through a plane perpendicular to
field and the area of the plane.
• Current carrying wire produces magnetic field.
• F = qvB sin θ and F = ILB sin θ
• In electric motor, electrical energy is converted into mechanical energy.
• Faraday’s law: The induced EMF generated in a closed loop is equal to the rate of change ofmagnetic flux passing through it.
• Lenz’s law: the induced current set up in the coil is in such a direction that it opposes thechanges in the flux.
• When a conductor of length ‘ l’ moves perpendicular to field B with a speed v then potential
difference (voltage) developed between the ends of conductor is B lv. This EMF is called motional
EMF.
•In generators, mechanical energy is converted into electrical energy.
1. Are the magnetic field lines closed? Explain. (AS1)
2. See fig. Q-2, magnetic lines are shown. What is the direction of the current flowing through the
wire?(AS1)
3. A bar magnet with North Pole facing towards a coil moves as shown in fig.Q-3. What happens
to the magnetic flux passing through the coil? (AS1)
4. A coil is kept perpendicular to the page. At P, current flows into the page and at Q it comes out
of the page as shown in figure Q-4. What is the direction of magnetic field due to the coil?
(AS1)What we have learnt
Improve your learning
fig- Q2
N
fig- Q3
fig- Q4xPQ
Electromagnetism 284 X Class
fig- Q7Bi
L
5. The direction of current flowing in a coil is shown in fig.Q-5. What type of
magnetic pole is formed at the face that has flow of current as shown in
fig.Q-5? (AS1)
6. Why does the picture appear distorted when a bar magnet is brought close
to the screen of a television? Explain (AS1)
7. Symbol ‘X’ indicates the direction of a magnetic field into the page. A straight
long wire carrying current along its length is kept perpendicular to the magneticfield. What is the magnitude of force experienced by the wire?  In what direction
does it act? (AS1)
8. Explain the working of electric motor with a neat diagram. (AS1)
9. Derive Faraday’s law of induction from law of conservation of energy. (AS1)10. The value of magnetic field induction which is uniform is 2T. What is the flux
passing through a surface of area 1.5m
2 perpendicular to the field? (AS1)
11. An 8N force acts on a rectangular conductor 20cm long placed perpendicular to a magnetic
field. Determine the magnetic field induction if the current in the conductor is 40A. (Ans: 1tesla)
(AS1)
12. Explain with the help of two activities that current carrying wire produces magnetic field. (AS1)
13. How do you verify experimentally that the current carrying conductor experiences a force
when it is kept in magneticfield? (AS1)
14. Explain Faraday’s law of induction with the help of activity. (AS1)
15. Explain the working of AC electric generator with a neat diagram. (AS1)16. Explain the working of DC generator with a neat diagram. (AS1)17. Rajkumar said to you that the magnetic field lines are open and they start at north pole of bar
magnet and end at south pole. What questions do you ask Rajkumar to correct him by saying
“field lines are closed”? (AS2)
18. As shown in figure Q-18 both coil and bar magnet moves in the
same direction. Your friend is arguing that there is no change in
flux. Do you agree with his statement? If not what doubts do you
have? Frame questions about the doubts you have regarding
change in flux. (AS2)
19. What experiment do you suggest to understand Faraday’s law?
What items are required? What suggestions do you give to getgood results of the experiment? Give precautions also. (AS3)
20. How can you verify that a current carrying wire produces a magnetic field with the help of an
experiment? (AS3)
21. Collect information about generation of current by using Faraday’s law. (AS4)
22. Collect information about material required and procedure of making a simple electric motor
from internet and make a simple motor on your own. (AS4)
fig- Q18NV
Cfig- Q5
Free distribution by A.P. Government 28523. Collect information of experiments done by Faraday. (AS4)
24. Draw a neat diagram of electric motor. Name the parts. (AS5)25. Draw a neat diagram of an AC generator. (AS5)
26. How do you appreciate Faraday’s law, which is the consequence of conservation of energy?
(AS6)
27. How do you appreciate the relation between magnetic field and electricity that changed the life
style of mankind? (AS6)
28. Give a few applications of Faraday’s law of induction in daily life. (AS7)
29. Which of the various methods of current generation protects nature well? Give examples to
support your answer. (AS7)
1. The SI unit of magnetic field induction is ........................
2. Magnetic flux is the product of magnetic field induction and .................
3. The charge is moving along the direction of magnetic field. Then force acting on it is ...............
4. A current carrying wire of length L is placed perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field B. Then
the force acting on the wire with current I is .....................
5. Faraday’s law of induction is the consequence of .....................
1. Which converts electrical energy into mechanical energy [ ]
a) motor b) battery
c) generator d) switch
2. Which converts mechanical energy into electrical energy [ ]
a) motor b) batteryc) generator d) switch
3. The magnetic force on a current carrying wire placed in uniform magnetic field if the wire is
oriented perpendicular to magnetic field, is ................. [ ]a) 0 b) ILB
c) 2ILB d) ILB/2Fill in the blanks
Multiple choice questions
Principles of Metallurgy 286 X ClassPrinciples of Metallurgy13Chapter
In class 8 you have studied about certain properties of metals like,
malleability, ductility, sonarity etc. Metals play an important role in our
daily life. We use various metals for various purposes like gold and silver
as jewellary, copper, iron, alluminium for making conducting wires and
for making utensils etc. We use many house hold articles made up of metalsand their alloys at our home.
•Can you mention some articles that are made  up of metals?
•Do metals exist in nature in the form same as that we use in our daily
life?
•Have you ever heard the words like ore, mineral and metallurgy?
•Do you know how these metals are obtained?
To understand these questions you need to know about metallurgy. In
this chapter we discuss various concepts related to metallurgy and the
process by which we are able to obtain the pure form of metal that we use
in our daily life.
“Metallurgy  is the process of extraction of metals from their ores”.
Human history in terms of materials had the Bronze Age and Iron Age
pertaining to the metals they started to use the bronze (an alloy of copper
and tin) and iron. Now we have more than 75% metals among the elements
available.
Occurrence of the metals in nature
•How the metals are present in nature?
The earth’s crust is the major source of metals. Sea water also contains
some soluble salts such as sodium chloride and magnesium chloride etc.

Free distribution by A.P. Government 287
Think and discussSome metals like gold (Au), silver (Ag) and copper (Cu) are available in
nature in free state (native) as they are least reactive. Other metals mostly
are found in nature in the combined form due to their more reactivity. The
elements or compounds of the metals which occur in nature in the earth
crust are called  minerals.  At some places, minerals contain a very high
percentage of a particular metal and the metal can be profitably extracted
from it. The minerals from which the metals are extracted without
economical loss are called ores.
Aluminium, for example, is the most common metal in the Earth’s
crust, occurring in most of minerals. However, it isn’t economically
feasible to extract it from most of these minerals. Instead, the usual ore
from which it is profitable to extract it is bauxite – which contains from
50 – 70 %  of aluminium oxide .
Activity 1
Look at the following ores.
Identify the metal present in each ore.
Table - 1•Do you agree with the statement “All ores are minerals but all
minerals need not be ores?” Why?
ORE Formula          metal ORE Formula              metal
Bauxite (Al2O3 2H2O)   A l
Copper Iron Pyrites (CuFeS2)  C u
Zinc Blende (ZnS)   Zn
Magnesite (MgCO3)  M g
Epsom salt (MgSO4 7H2O) Mg
Horn Silver (AgC l)  A g
Pyrolusite (MnO2)  M n
Haematite (Fe2O3)  F eZincite (ZnO)   Zn
Rock salt (NaC l)  N a
Cinnabar (HgS)   Hg
 Magnetite (Fe3O4)  F e
Galena (PbS)   Pb
Gypsum                (CaSO4 2H2O)       Ca
Lime stone (CaCO3)  C a
Carnallite      (KC l MgC l2 6H2O)      Mg
Principles of Metallurgy 288 X ClassNow try to classify them as shown in the table.
Table - 2
•What metals can we get from the ores mentioned in the Table – 1?
•Can you arrange these metals in the order of their reactivity?
•What do you notice in Table – 2?
You will notice that the ores of many metals are oxides and sulphides.
This is why oxygen - sulphur (16th  group) group is called chalcogen family
(chalco = ore; genus = produce)
The metals like K, Na, Ca, Mg and Al are so reactive that they are
never found in nature in free state.
The metals like Zn, Fe, Pb etc., are moderately reactive. They are found
in the earth crust mainly as oxides, sulphides and carbonates.
Metals like Au, Ag are least reactive and they are found even in free
state in nature.
Based on reactivity we can arrange metal in descending order of their
reactivity as shown below:
   K, Na, Ca, Mg, Al       Zn, Fe, Pb, Cu       Ag, Au–––––––––––––––       –––––––––––––––           –––––––––––––        High reactivity                      Moderate reactivity                  Low reactivity
•Can you think how do we get these metals from their ores?
•Does the reactivity of a metal and form of its ore (oxides, sulphides,
chlorides, carbonates sulphates) has any relation with process of
extraction?
•How are metals extracted from mineral ores?
•What methods are to be used?
Let us find.
Extraction of metals from the ores:
The extraction of a metal from its ore involves mainly three stages.
They are:
I) Concentration or DressingII) Extraction of crude metal
III)Refining or purification of the metal.I Oxides Sulphides Chlorides Carbonates Sulphates
Free distribution by A.P. Government 289I.   Concentration or Dressing of the ore
Ores that are mined from the earth are usually contaminated with large
amount of impurities such as soil and sand etc.
Concentration or Dressing means, simply getting rid of as much of
the unwanted rocky material as possible from the ore.  The impurities like
clay are called gangue. Here, we should get as for as possible pure or
more concentrated ore.
Enrichment (concentration) of the ore: Various physical methods are
used to enrich the ore. In many cases, it is possible to separate the metalcompound from unwanted rocky material by physical means. An examplefor this  is froth flotation.
The physical methods adopted in dressing of the ore (or) enriching of
the ore depends upon difference between physical properties of ore and
gangue.Concentration of oreOreHand picking
WashingFroth flotationMagnetic Separation
Chemical Reduction
Auto ReductionDisplacement method
Electrolytic reductionDistillation
Poling
Liquation
Electrolytic refiningby
Extraction of crude
metal from the ore
Metals of high
reactivityMetals of medium
reactivityMetals of low
reactivity
Sulphide ore
Roasting
Reduction
Refining
(eg:Ag)Oxides
MetalCarbonate
oreSulphide
ore
Calcination Roasting
Oxide ofmetal
Reduction of metal
Refining of metal
(eg. Cu, Zn, etc.,)Oxides
Electrolysis of
molten ore
Metal
(eg: Na, Mg, Al, etc.,)Halides
Principles of Metallurgy 290 X ClassName of the
methodProcess
Hand picking If the ore particles and the impurities are different in
one of the properties like colour, size etc., Using that
property the ore particles are handpicked separatingthem from other impurities.
Washing Ore particles are crushed and kept on a slopy surface.
They are washed with controlled flow of water. Less
densive impurities are carried away by water flow,
leaving the more densive ore particles behind.
Froth floatation This method is mainly useful for sulphide ores whichhave no wetting property whereas the impurities get
wetted. The ore with impurities is finely powdered andkept in water taken in a flotation cell. Air under pressure
is blown to produce froth in water. Froth so produced,
takes the ore particles to the surface whereas impuritiessettle at the bottom. Froth is separated and washed to
get ore particles.(see fig.1)
Magnetic separation If the ore or impurity, one of them is magnetic substanceand the other non-magnetic substance they are separated
using electromagnets. (see Fig.2)
Froth bubbles
carrying sulphide
ore particlesCompressed
Air
Sulphide ore
particles
Water
containing
pine oil
Gangue
fig-1: Froth floatation process for the
concentration of sulphide ores
Powdered ore
Magnetic
wheel
Moving belt
Non Magnetic oreNon
Magnetic
wheel
fig-2: Magnetic separationMagnetic oreTable-3
There are some other methods also for dressing which you will learn at higher classes.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 291Metals Action of
OxygenReaction with
cold waterReaction with
steamReaction with dilute
strong AcidsReaction with
chlorine on heating
K
Na
Ca
Mg
Al
Zn
Fe
Pb
CuHg
Ag
Pt
AuForm Na
2O, K2O
in limited supply of
O2 but form
peroxides in excessof O
2K to Mg displaceH
2 from cold
water withdecreasingreactivity{K violently butMg very slowly}K to Fe displaceH
2 with steam
without decreasingreactivity.{K very violentlybut Fe veryslowly}K to Pb displace H
2
from dilute strongacids with decreasingreactivity.{K-explosively,Mg-very vigorously,Fe-steadily,Pb-very slowly}All metals react withChlorine on heating toformtheir respective Chloridesbut with decreasingreactivity from top tobottom. This is understoodfrom the heat evolvedwhen the metal reacts withone mole of Chlorine gasto form Chloride.
Burn withdecreasing vigourto form oxidesCaO, MgO,Al
2O3, ZnO,
Fe2O3
Don’t burn, butonly form a surfacelayer of oxidePbO, CuO, HgO
Don’t burn oroxidise even onthe surfaceFrom Al to Au donot displace H
2
from cold water
From Pb to Audonot displace H
2
from steamCu to Au do notdisplace H
2 from
dilute strong acidsKCl, NaC l, CaC l2,
MgC l2, Al2Cl3, ZnC l2,
FeCl3, PbC l2, CuC l2,
HgCl2, AgC l, PtC l3
and AuCl3 are formedReactivity of Metals            Table-4
Principles of Metallurgy 292 X ClassII   Extraction of crude metal from the ore
Extraction of the metal from its ores depends on the reactivity of the
metal. To understand the order of reactivity of metals that are very familiar,
we study their chemical reactions with cold water, steam, dilute strong
acids and C l2 and based on their vigorous activity order in these reactions
we frame out activity series. Arrangement of the metals in decreasing order
of their reactivity is known as activity series . (See table - 4)
Reduction of purified ore to the metal
The method used for a particular metal for the reduction of its ore to
the metal depends mainly on the position of the metal in the activity series.
A) Extraction of Metals at the top of the activity series
(K, Na, Ca, Mg and Al). Simple chemical reduction methods like
heating with C, CO etc to reduce the ores of these metals are not feasible.The temperature required for the reduction is too high and more expensive.To make the process economical, electrolysis methods are to be adopted.
Again the electrolysis of their aqueous solutions also is not feasible
because water in the solution would be discharged at the cathode inpreference to the metal ions.
The only method viable is to extract these metals by electrolysis of
their fused compounds. For example to extract Na from NaCl, fused NaCl
is electrolysed with steel cathode (-) and graphite anode (+). The metal(Na) will be deposited at cathode and chloride liberated at the anode.
At Cathode 2Na
+  +  2e–  J  2Na
At Anode 2C l –  J  Cl2 + 2e–
For the above electrolysis, a large quantity of electricity is required
to keep the ore in molten state. Suitable impurities are added to the ore to
decrease its melting point.
B)  Extraction of metals in the middle of the activity series
(Zinc, iron, tin, lead and copper): The ores of these metals are generally
present as sulphides or carbonates in nature. Therefore prior to reductionof ores of these metals, they must be converted into metal oxides.
Sulphide ores are converted into oxides by heating them strongly in
excess of air. This process is known as roasting.  Generally the sulphide
Free distribution by A.P. Government 293ores are roasted to convert them into oxides before reducing them to
metal.
Eg: 2PbS  +  3O2  J  2PbO  +  2SO2
The metal oxides are then reduced to the corresponding metal by using
suitable reducing agent such as carbon
i) Reduction of metal oxides with carbon : The oxides are reduced
by coke in a closed furnace which gives the metal and carbon monoxide
(CO).
                   at 1400 oC
Eg: PbO  + C        –––––––––– >  Pb  +  CO
ii) Reduction of oxide ores with CO .
          in blast furnace
Eg: Fe2O3  +  3CO   –––––––––––– > 2Fe  +  3CO2
iii) Auto (self) reduction of sulphide ores:  In the extraction of Cu
from its sulphide ore, the ore is subjected partial roasting in air to give its
oxide.
2Cu2S  +  3O2  J  2Cu2O  +  2SO2
When the supply of air is stopped and the temperature is raised. The
rest of the sulphide reacts with oxide and forms the metal and SO2.
2Cu2O  +  Cu2S  J  6Cu  +  2SO2
iv)Reduction of ores (compounds) by more reactive metals.
Thermite process involves the reaction of metal oxides with
aluminium. When highly reactive metals such as sodium, calcium,
aluminium etc., are used as reducing agents, they displace metals of lower
reactivity from the compound. These displacement reactions are highly
exothermic. The amount of heat evolved is so large that the metals
produced are in molten state.
                                              850 oCEg: TiC l4  +  2Mg   –––––––––––– >Ti + 2MgC l2
         850 oC      TiC l4  +  4Na   –––––––––––– >  Ti + 4NaC l
Principles of Metallurgy 294 X ClassThe reaction of Iron (III) oxide (Fe2O3), with aluminium is used to
join railings of railway tracks or cracked machine parts. This reaction is
known as the thermite reaction .
2Al + Fe2O3  J Al2O3 + 2Fe  +  Heat
2Al + Cr2O3  J Al2O3 + 2Cr  +  Heat
C) Extraction of metals at the bottom of the activity series
(Ag, Hg etc)
Metals at the bottom of the activity series are often found in free
state. Their reactivity with other atoms is very low. The oxides of these
metals can be reduced to metals  by heat alone and sometimes by
displacement from their aqueous solutions.
i) When cinnabar (HgS) whch is an ore of mercury, heated in air, it is
first converted into (HgO) then reduced to mercury on further heating.
Eg: 2HgS  +  3O2  –––– >  2HgO  +  2SO2 –––– > 2HgO  –––> 2Hg  +  O2    Heat                                       Heat                   Heat
ii) Displacement from aqueous solutions:
Eg: Ag2S  +  4CN-  J 2[Ag(CN)2]-  +  S2-
       2[Ag(CN)2]- (aq) +  Zn(s) J [Zn(CN)4]2- (aq) +  2Ag (s)
Here Ag2S is dissolved in say KCN solution to get dicyanoargentate
(I) ions. From these ions Ag is precipitated by treating with Zn dust powder.
III. Purification of the crude metal
The metal obtained by the reduction of the ore is usually contaminated
with impurities like unchanged ore, other metals present in the ore and
non metals from the anions in the ore.
For example, the (blister) copper obtained from its sulphide ore, a
compound of copper iron pyrites (CuFeS2), contains some copper sulphide,
iron and sulphur. It is purified by suitable methods including electrolysis.
The process of obtaining the pure metal from the impure metal is called
refining of the metal. Refining of the metal involves several types of
processes. Some refining methods are given below:
fig-3(a)
 fig-3(b) fig-3(c)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 295a) Distillation    (b) Poling    (c) Liquation   (d)   Electrolysis  etc.
The process that has to be adopted for purification of a given metal
depends on the nature of the metal and its impurities?
a) Distillation:  This method is very useful for purification of  low
boiling metals like zinc and mercury containing high boiling metals as
impurities. The extracted metal in the molten state is distilled to obtain
the pure metal as distillate.
b) Poling:  The molten metal is stirred with logs (poles) of green wood.
The impurities are removed either as gases or they get oxidized and form
scum (slag) over the surface of the molten metal. Blister copper is purified
by this method. The reducing gases, evolved from the wood, prevent the
oxidation of copper.
c) Liquation:  In this method a low melting metal like tin can be made
to flow on a slopy surface to separate it from high melting impurities.
d) Electrolytic refining:  In this method, the impure metal is made
to act as anode. A strip of the same metal in pure form is used as cathode.They are put in a suitable electrolytic bath containing soluble salt of the
same metal. The required metal gets deposited on the cathode in the pure
form. The metal, constituting the impurity, goes as the anode mud. Thereactions are:
Anode:    M  J   M
n+   +   ne-
Cathode:  Mn+   +   ne-    J M
(M = pure metal )
Where n = 1,2,3, ...
We use this electrolytic method
to refine copper.
 For this an impure copper is
taken as anode and pure copper strips
are taken as cathode. The electrolyteis an acidified solution of copper sulphate. As a result of electrolysis
copper in pure form is transferred from the anode to the cathode.
Anode: Cu  J Cu
2+   +   2e-
Cathode:  Cu2+   +   2e-    J Cu
The soluble impurities go into the solution, where as insoluble
impurities from the blister copper get deposited at the bottom of anode as
anode mud which contains antimony selenium, tellurium, silver, gold and
platinum; recovery of these elements may meet the cost of refining.
Zinc may also be refined this way.
fig-4: Experimental setup for the electrolytic
refining of copper
Principles of Metallurgy 296 X ClassCorrosion
The rusting of iron (iron oxide), tarnishing of silver (silver sulphide),
development of green coating on copper (copper carbonate) and bronze
are some of the examples of corrosion.
•Do you know why corrosion occurs?
Let us find
Activity  2
•Take three test tubes and place clean iron nails in each of them.
•Label these test tubes A,B and C. pour some water in test tube A and
cork it.
•Pour boiled distilled water in test tube B, add about 1 ml of oil  and
cork it. The oil will float on water and prevent the air from dissolving
in the water.
•Put some anhydrous calcium chloride in test
tube C and cork it. Anhydrous calcium chloride
will absorb the moisture, if any, from the air.Leave these test tubes for a few days and thenobserve  (see figure).
You will observe that iron nails rust in test
tube A, but they do not rust in test tubes B and C.In the test tube A. The nails are exposed to bothair and water. In the test tube B, the nails are
exposed to only water, and the nails in test tube
C are exposed to dry air.
•  What does this tell us about the conditions
under which iron articles rust?In metallic corrosion, a metal is oxidised by loss of electrons generally
to oxygen and results in the formation of oxides. Corrosion of iron
(commonly known as rusting) occurs in presence of water and air.
The chemistry of corrosion is quite complex but it may be considered
essentially as an electrochemical phenomenon. During corrosion at a
particular spot on the surface of an object made of iron, oxidation takes
place and that spot behaves as anode. We can write the reaction as.
Anode:     2Fe
(s)  J   2Fe2+   +   4e–
Boiled
distilled waterAnhydrous
calcium chlorideWaterRusty
ironnailsAir Air Dryair
Layerof oil
fig-5: Investigating the conditions
under which iron rusts
Free distribution by A.P. Government 297Electrons released at this anodic spot move through the metal and go
to another spot on the metal and reduce oxygen at that spot in presence of
H+ (which is believed to be available from H2CO3 formed due to dissolution
of carbon dioxide from air into water in moist air condition of atmosphere.
Hydrogen ion in water may also be available due to dissolution of other
acidic oxides from the atmosphere). This spot behaves as cathode with the
reaction is.
Cathode:    O2(g)   +   4H+ (aq)  +  4e-  J 2H2 O(l)
The overall reaction is: 2Fe(s)+O2(g)+4H+
(aq)J 2Fe2+
(aq)+2H2O(l)
The ferrous ions are further oxidised by atmospheric oxygen to ferric
ions which come out as rust in the form of hydrated ferric oxide
(Fe2O3.XH2O) and with further production of hydrogen ions.
Prevention of corrosion
Prevention of corrosion is of prime importance. It not only saves money
but also helps in preventing accidents such as a bridge collapse or failure
of a key component due to corrosion.
One of the simplest methods of preventing corrosion is to prevent the
surface of the metallic object to come in contact with atmosphere. This
can be done by covering the surface with paint or by some chemicals
(eg: bisphenol).
Another simple method is to cover the surface by other metals
(Sn, Zn etc) that are inert or react themselves with atmosphere to save the
object.  This is generally done by electroplating.
An electrochemical method is to provide a sacrificial electrode of
another metal (like Mg, Zn etc) which corrodes itself but saves the object.
Do you know?
Alloying is a method of improving the properties of a metal. We can get desired
properties by this method. For example, iron is the most widely used metal. But it
is never used in its pure state. This is because pure iron is very soft and stretches
easily when hot. But, if it is mixed with a small amount of carbon, it becomes hard
and strong. When iron is mixed with nickel and chromium we get stainless steelwhich will not rust. Pure gold, known as 24 carat gold, is very soft. It is, therefore,
not suitable for making jewellery. It is alloyed with either silver or copper tomake it hard. Generally in India 22carat gold is used for making ornaments. Itmeans that 22 parts of pure gold is alloyed with  2 parts of either silver or  copper.
Principles of Metallurgy 298 X Class
fig-6: Blast furanceSkip
car
Charge
hoppers
Waste
gases
Alternating
layers of iron
ore and coke
Hot air
Molten iron∼200 oC
∼700 oC
∼1200 oC
∼2000 oC
Molten
slagFusionzoneHeat
absorption
zoneReduction
Combustionzone
Ore
Hearth
fig-7: Reverberatory
furnaceA few important processes used in metallurgy
Smelting: Smelting is a pyrochemical ( pyre = heat ) process, in which
the ore is mixed with flux and fuel and strongly heated. The heat is so strong
that the ore is reduced to even metal as in the case of iron (Fe), and the metal
is obtained in molten state. During smelting the impurities (gangue) in the
ore react with flux to form slag which is removed. For haematite (Fe2O3)ore,
coke is used as fuel and lime stone (CaCO3) is used as flux. The smelting is
carried out in a specially built furnace known as blast furnace.
The reactions inside the furnace are:
2C(s)   +   O2 (g)   –––– >  2CO(g)Fuel
Fe2O3(s)   +   3CO(g)   –––– >  2Fe(l)   +   3CO2(g)
haematite
CaCO3(s)              –––– >  CaO(s)   +   CO2 (g)
Limestone(flux)                          lime
CaO(s)   +   SiO2(s)   –––– >   CaSiO3(l)
Lime              silica(gangue)              calcium silicate(slag)
Roasting: R oasting is a pyrochemical process
in which the ore is heated in the presence of
oxygen or air below its melting point. The products
(like metal oxide from sulphide ore) obtained in
the process also are in solid state. Generallyreverberatory furnace is used for roasting.
2ZnS
(s)   +   3O2(g)   –––– >  2ZnO(s)   +    2SO2(g)
zinc blende
Fire
box
Free distribution by A.P. Government 299Key words
Minerals, ores, froth flotation, Thermite process, distillation,
poling, liquation, electrolytic refining, smelting, roasting,
calcinations, blast furnace, reverberatory furnace.Calcination:  Calcination is a pyrochemical process in which the
ore is heated in the absence of air. The ore gets generally decomposed in
the process.
Eg: MgCO3(s)   J    MgO(s)   +   CO2(g)
CaCO3(s)    J     CaO(s)   +   CO2(g)
Flux: Flux is a substance added to the ore to remove the gangue from
it by reacting with the gangue. If the impurity (gangue) is acidic substance
like SiO2, basic substance like CaO is used as flux and if the impurity is of
basic nature like FeO acidic flux like SiO2 is added to the gangue.
CaO(s)   +     SiO2(s)–––– >   CaSiO3(l)
flux                  silica(gangue) calcium silicate(slag)
FeO(s)   +   SiO2(s)–––– >   FeSiO3(l)
gangue              flux calcium silicate(slag)
•What is the role of furnace in metallurgy?
•How they bear large amounts of heat?
•Do all furnaces have same structure?
Let us see:
Furnace: Furnace is the one which is used to carry out pyrochemical
processes in metallurgy. We have mainly three parts in a furnace known
as Hearth, Chimney and fire box.
Hearth is the place inside the furnace where the ore is kept for heating
purpose.
Chimney is the outlet through which flue (waste) gases go out of the
furnace.
Fire box is the part of the furnace where the fuel is kept for burning.
In Blast furnace both fire box and hearth are combined in big chamber
which accommodates both ore and fuel. Reverberatory furnace has both
fire box and hearth separated, but the vapours (flame) obtained due to the
burning of the fuel touch the ore in the hearth and heat it.
In furnaces like retort furnaces there is no direct contact between the
hearth or fire box and even the flames do not touch the ore.
Principles of Metallurgy 300 X Class•A metallic compound occurring in the earth crust along with impurities is called mineral.
•A mineral from which a metal can be extracted economically and conveniently is called ore.
• The impurity present in the ore is called gangue..
•The substance added to the ore to remove gangue from it is called flux.
•The extraction of metal from its ore involves mainly three stages: Concentration, Extraction of
crude metal, Refining of the metal.
•Physical methods adopted in dressing the ore are : hand picking, washing, froth flotation, Magnetic
separation etc.
•Activity series.
•The methods used for Extracting of Crude metal are Calcination, Roasting, Chemical reduction,
Auto reduction, Displacement  method, Electrolytic reduction .
•Calcination is a process of heating the ore strongly in the absence of air or oxygen.
•During calcinations, carbonate is converted to its oxide.
•Roasting is a process of heating the ore strongly in a free supply of air or oxygen.
•Calcination and Roasting are  carried out in a reverberatory furnace
•Purification methods
•Corrosion and prevention of corrosion.
1. List three metals that are found in nature as Oxide ores.(AS1)
2. List three metals that are found in nature in uncombined form. (AS1)
3.  Write a note on dressing of ore in metallurgy? (AS1)4. What is an ore? On what basis a mineral is chosen as an ore? (AS1)5. Write the names of any two ores of iron? (AS1)6. How do metals occur in nature? Give examples to any two types of minerals. (AS1)
7. Write short notes on froth floatation process? (AS1)8. When do we use magnetic separation method for concentration of an ore? Explain with an
example? (AS1)
9. Write short notes on each of the following : (AS1)
i)Roasting      ii) Calcination    iii) Smelting.
10. What is the difference between roasting and calcinations? Give one example for each? (AS1)11. Define the terms i) gauge  ii) slag.  (AS1)12. Magnesium is an active metal if it occurs as a chloride in nature, which method of reduction is
suitable for its extraction? (AS2)
13. Mention two methods which produce very pure metals? (AS2)14. Which method do you suggest for extraction of high reactivity metals? Why? (AS2)15. Suggest an experiment to prove that the presence of air and water are essential for corrosion.
Explain the procedure. (AS3)Improve your learning
What we have learnt

Free distribution by A.P. Government 301Multiple choice questionsFill in the blanks16. Collect information about extraction of metals of low reactivity silver, platinum and gold and
prepare a report. (AS4)
17. Draw the diagram  showing i) Froth  floatation    ii) Magnetic separation. (AS5)
18. Draw a neat diagram of Reverboratory furnace and label it neatly? (AS5)19. What is activity series? How it helps in extraction of metals? (AS6)
20. What is thermite process? Mention its applications in daily life? (AS7)
21. Where do we use handpicking and washing methods in our daily life? Give examples. How do
you correlate these examples with enrichment of ore? (AS7)
1. The method suitable to enrich the sulphide ores is………………………2. Arranging metals in the decreasing order of their reactivity is called ………………3. The method suitable for purification of low boiling metals is  ……………………
4. Corrosion of iron occurs in the presence of ………….. and ……………..
5. The chemical process in which the ore is heated in the absence of air is called …
1. The impurity present in the ore is called as _________ [ ]
a) Gangue b) flux c) Slag d) Mineral
2. Which of the following is a carbonate ore? [ ]
a)  Magnesite b) Bauxite c) Gypsum d) Galena
3. Which of the following is the correct formula of Gypsum [ ]
      a) CuSO
4. 2H2O b) CaSO4. ½ H2O c) CuSO4. 5H2O d) CaSO4. 2H2O
4. The oil used in the froth floatation process is __________ [ ]
a)  kerosene  oil b) pine oil c) coconut oil d) olive oil.
5. Froth floatation is method used for the purification of ______ore. [ ]
a)  sulphide b) oxide c) carbonate d) nitrate
6. Galena is an ore of ———————— [ ]
a)  Zn b) Pb c) Hg d) Al
7. The metal that occurs in the native form is __________ [ ]
a)  Pb b) Au c) Fe d) Hg
8. The most abundant metal in the earth’s crust is —————— [ ]
a)  Silver b) Aluminium c) zinc d) iron
9. The reducing agent in thermite process is ___________ [  ]
a)  Al b) Mg c) Fe d) Si
10.   The purpose of smelting an ore is to __________ it. [ ]
a)  Oxidise b) Reduce c) Neutralise d) none of these
Carbon and its Compounds 302 X ClassThe food you eat, the clothes you wear, the cosmetics you use, the
fuels you use to run automobiles are all the compounds of carbon.
Carbon was discovered in prehistory and it was known to the ancients.
They used to manufacture charcoal by burning organic material.
Carbon  is a non-metal. It belongs to the fourteenth group or IV A
group in the modern periodical table. The elements of this group have four
electrons in the valence shell.
Let us write the electronic configuration of Carbon (6C).
Atomic number of carbon is 6.
Electronic configuration of carbon (ground state) 6C: 1s2 2s2 2p2. To
get the octet in its outer shell it has to gain four more electrons to form
C4-.  The electronegativity of carbon is only 2.5 and its nucleus has only
six protons. Therefore it would be difficult for a nucleus with six protonsto hold ten electrons. Hence, carbon cannot form C
4- ions so easily.
•Can carbon get helium configuration by losing four electrons fromthe outer shell?
 If carbon loses four electrons from the outer shell, it has to form C
4+
ions. This requires huge amount of energy which is not available normally.
Therefore C4+ formation also is a remote possibility. Carbon has to satisfy
its tetravalency by sharing electrons with other atoms. It has to form fourcovalent bonds either with its own atoms or atoms of other elements.Carbon and its
Compounds14Chapter

Free distribution by A.P. Government 303The possibility of bonds formation by a carbon atom is as:
a) i. Four single covalent bonds, with atoms of same element like
hydrogen,  Chlorine
Eg: CH4, CCl4or ,
ii. Four single covalent bonds with atoms of different elements ;
Eg:            
b) Carbon atoms may form one double bond and two single bonds
Eg:  ;
c) Carbon atom may form one single bond and a triple bond
Eg:  H–C
 C–H or CH3 –C
 N or carbon atoms may also
       form two double bonds as in CH2 = C = CH2.
•How do carbon atoms form bonds in so many different ways as
mentioned above?
•Explain the four unpaired electrons in carbon atom through excited
state.
As per valence bond theory (see chapter, chemical bonding), the four
unpaired electrons in a carbon atom are shown by suggesting excited state
to carbon atom.
Electronic configuration of carbon (ground state):
1s2 2s2 2p2 (or) 1s2 2s2 2px1 2py12pz0
Carbon (ground state)
Electronic configuration of carbon (excited state):
1s2 2s1 2px1 2py1 2pz1
Carbon (excited state)
1s 2s 2p
1s 2s 2pC l
|
Cl – C – C l
|
Cl
H
|
H – C – C l
|
BrH
|
H – C – H
|
H
H H
H HCCHO
HHC C H
Carbon and its Compounds 304 X Class
In excited state carbon atom gets its
one of the ‘2s’ electrons to say 2pz.
Each carbon atom has four unpaired
electrons when excited and tends to form
four covalent bonds.
•Where this energy to excite electron
comes from?
We have to understand that free
carbon atom would not be in excited state
under normal conditions. When thecarbon atom is ready to form bonds withother atoms, the energy required forexcitation is taken up from bond
energies, which are the liberated energieswhen bonds are formed between carbonatom and other atoms.
•In methane (CH
4) molecule all four
carbon – hydrogen bonds are
identical and bond angle HC∧ H is
109o28/. How can we explain this?
In the above discussion, we have
found that in excited state, carbon atom
has three unpaired electrons in p-orbitalsand one electron in s-orbital. These fourvalence electrons are with different
energies.Linus Pauling -  The world’s
one of the greatest scientists
and a great humanist. He was
acknowledged as the most
influential chemist.
He is the only person ever
to receive two unshared NobelPrizes — for Chemistry
(1954) and for Peace (1962).
•How these energetically unequal valence electrons form four equivalent
covalent bonds in methane molecule?
Let us see how?
Promotion of an electron
When bonds are formed, energy is released and the system becomes more
stable. If carbon forms four bonds rather than two, still more energy is
released and so the resulting molecule becomes even more stable.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 305The energy difference between the 2s
and 2p orbitals is very small. When carbon
atom is ready to form bonds it gets a smallamount of energy from bond energies and
gets excited to promote an electron from
the 2s to the empty 2p to give four unpaired
electrons.
We have got four unpaired electrons
ready for bonding, but these electrons are
in two different kinds of orbitals and their
energies are different. We are not going toget four identical bonds unless these
unpaired electrons are in four identical
orbitals.
How to explain the four orbitals of
carbon containing unpaired electrons as energetically equal?
We can explain it by the phenomenon called hybridisation .
Hybridisation
In the excited carbon atom its one s-orbital (2s) and three  p-orbitals
(2px, 2py, 2pz) intermix and reshuffle into four identical orbitals known as
sp3 orbitals. Thus, carbon atom undergoes sp3 hybridisation.
The four electrons enter into the new four identical hybrid orbitals
known as sp3 hybrid orbitals one each as per Hund’s rule. (because they
are made from one ‘s-orbital’ and three ‘p-orbitals’ they are called sp3
orbitals).
NOTE: Read  “ sp3 “ as “ s p three”. or “yes pee three”
Do you know?
The concept of hybridisation was introduced by Linus Pauling (1931).  The
redistribution of orbitals of almost equal energy in individual atoms to give equal
number of new orbitals with identical properties like energy and shape is called“hybridisation”. The newly formed orbitals are called as ‘hybrid orbitals.’

2sEnergy
2py
2px2pz
sp3 hybrids

2s
2px
2py2pzPromotionEnergy

2s
2px
2py2pzEnergyFrom ground state to
excited state
Carbon and its Compounds 306 X ClassThe hybridisation enables the carbon to have four identical sp3 hybrid
orbitals and these have one electron each. Since carbon has four unpaired
electrons, it is capable of forming bonds with four other atoms may be
carbon or atoms of some other monovalent element. When carbon reacts
with hydrogen, four hydrogen atoms allow their ‘s’ orbitals containing one
electron each to overlap the four sp3orbitals of carbon atom which are
orieted at an angle of 109o28/ . (Four orbitals of an atom  in the outer shell
orient along the four corners of a tetrahedron to have minimum repulsionbetween their electrons). The nucleus of the atom is at the centre of the
tetrahedron. See figures below:
This leads to form four sp
3 – s sigma bonds between carbon atom and
four hydrogen atoms. All these bonds are of equal energy.
sp2 hybridisation
How do you explain the ability of C – atom to form two single covalent
bonds and one double bond?
Consider ethene  (ethylene , CH2 = CH2) molecule as the example.
In the formation of CH2=CH2 each carbon atom in its excited state
undergoes  sp2 hybridisation by intermixing one s-orbital (2s) and two
p-orbitals (say 2px, 2py) and reshuffling to form three sp2 orbitals.  Now
each carbon atom is left with one ‘p’ orbital (say pz) unhybridised. The
three sp2 orbitals having one electron each get separated around the nucleus
of carbon atoms at an angle of  120o. When carbon is ready to form bonds
one sp2 orbital of one carbon atom overlaps the sp2 orbital of the other2s2py2px2pzsp2 hybrids2pz Energy  
overlap
overlap
Free distribution by A.P. Government 307carbon atom to form sp2 – sp2 sigma ( σ) bond. The remaining two sp2
orbitals of each carbon atom get overlapped by‘s’ orbitals of two hydrogen
atoms containing unpaired electrons. The unhybridised pz orbitals on the
two carbon atoms overlap laterally as shown in figure to form a π bond.
That means there exists a sigma ( σ) bond and a pi ( π) bond between two
carbon atoms in ethene molecule. Hence, the molecule ethene (C2H4) is
The common name for Ethene is Ethylene.
sp hybridisation
Each carbon is only joining to two other atoms rather than four (as in
methane or ethane) or three (as in ethene). Here the carbon atoms hybridisetheir outer orbitals before forming bonds, this time they only hybridisetwo of the orbitals.
They use the ‘s’ orbital (2s) and one of the 2p orbitals, but leave the
other 2p orbitals unchanged. The new hybrid orbitals formed are called sp
hybrid orbitals , because they are made by an s-orbital and a p-orbital
reorganizing themselves.
How do you explain the ability of carbon atom to form one single
bond and one triple bond?
To know the ability of ‘C’ to form one single bond and one triple bond,
let us consider ethyne  (acetylene , C
2H2) molecule as our example.
In acetylene molecule there exists a triple bond between two carbon
atoms and the fourth valency of each carbon atom is satisfied by hydrogen
atoms (H–C  
 C–H ).HH
HHC C
figure of
C2H4
σsp2-s σsp2-sσsp2-s σsp2-s
σsp2-sp2
πpz-pz
Carbon and its Compounds 308 X ClassIn C2H2 molecule there are two carbon atoms and two hydrogen atoms.
In excited state each carbon atom undergoes sp- hybridisation by mixing
its one ‘s’ orbital (2s) and one ‘p’ orbital (2px) and reshuffling to form two
identical orbitals known as sp-orbitals . Each carbon atom has two
unhybridised p-orbitals (say 2py, 2pz).
One sp-orbital of a carbon overlaps the sp-orbital of other carbon to
give sp-sp sigma bond. The other   sp-orbital of each carbon atom overlaps
‘ s ’ orbital of a hydrogen atom to form a s-sp sigma bond. The unhybridised‘p’ orbitals of one carbon atom laterally overlap the unhybridised ‘p’ orbitals
of other carbon atom to give two π bonds between two carbon atoms
(say πp
y-py, πpz-pz , see figure). Thus ethyne molecule  H–C  
 C–H and
there exists three  σ-bonds and two π-bonds in the molecule.
•Predict the bond distance between the nuclei of carbon atoms that
 form bonds and bond energies order of H–C  =_
  C–H   ,     and
                  Explain it.
•What are bond angles HC∧ H in CH4, C2H4 and C2H2 molecules?
Allotropes of Carbon
The property of an element to exist in two or more physical forms
having more or less similar chemical properties but different physical
properties is called allotropy . The different forms of the element are called
allotropes.  Allotropes form due to the difference in the arrangement of
atoms in the molecules.
σsp-sp
σs-spσs-sp πpz-pzπpy-py
ΗΗ
  
figure of C2H2

2s
2py
2px2pz
sp hybrids
2pz
2py
H H
H HC C
H
HC CH
HH HEnergy
Free distribution by A.P. Government 309The allotropes of carbon are classified into two types. They are
•  Amorphous forms
•  Crystalline forms
Amorphous forms
Different amorphous allotropes of carbon are: Coal; Coke; Wood
Charcoal; Animal charcoal; Lamp black; Gas carbon; Petroleum coke; Sugar
charcoal.
Crystalline forms
Carbon atoms can arrange themselves into different hybridised
chemical bonds. Therefore they exhibit different physical and chemicalstructures such as diamond and graphite. Carbon in solid phase can exist
in three crystalline allotropic forms: diamond, graphite and
buckminsterfullerene.
Diamond and graphite form covalent network structures whereas
buckminster fullerene has a molecular solid structure with discrete C
60
molecules. As these crystalline allotropes differ in their structures, theypossess different physical properties.
Diamond
In diamond each carbon atom undergoes in its excited state sp3
hybridisation. Hence, each carbon atom has a tetrahedral environment. Thethree dimensional structure of diamond is as shown:
             Lattice structure of diamond  Diamond structure
As C-C bonds are very strong any attempt to distort the diamond
structure requires large amount of energy. Hence diamond is one of thehardest materials known.
Graphite
Graphite forms a two dimensional layer structure with C-C bonds within
the layers. There are relatively weak interactions between the layers.

Carbon and its Compounds 310 X ClassThe arrangement of carbon atoms in graphite layers
In the layer structure, the carbon atoms are in a trigonalplanar
environment. This is consistent with each carbon atom in sp2 hybridisation.
Interactions between the sp2 orbitals (overlaps) lead to the formation of
C-C bonds. Each carbon atom is with one unhybridised ‘p’ orbital. The
unhybridised ‘p’ orbitals interact to form a π system which is delocalised
over the whole layer. The interactions known as London dispersion forces
between the layers which are separated by a distance of 3.35  Ao  are weakened
by the presence of water molecules so that it is easy to cleave graphite.
For this reason graphite is used as lubricant and as the ‘lead’ in pencils.
•How do you understand the markings (writings) of a pencil on a paper?
When we write with a pencil, the interlayer attractions breakdown and
leave graphite layers on the paper. Pencil marks are easy to remove from
paper with an eraser because, the layers do not bind strongly to the paper.
Graphite is a good conductor of electricity because of the delocalised
π electron system.
Buckminsterfullerene (60C)
Buckminsterfullerenes are molecules of varying sizes that are
composed entirely of carbon. The arrangement of these molecules leads
to the form of a hollow sphere, ellipsoid, or tube depending upon theirorientations. Fullerenes are formed when vaporized carbon condenses in
an atmosphere of an inert gas.
Do you know?
The buckminsterfullerene , or usually just  fullerene  for short, was discovered
in 1985 by a team of scientists, Robert F. Curl, Harold W. Kroto and Richard E.Smalley from Rice University and the University of Sussex, three of whom were
awarded the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. They are named so for the resemblance
of their structure to the geodesic structures devised by the scientist and architect
Richard Buckminster “Bucky” Fuller .

Free distribution by A.P. Government 311Buckyballs: Spherical fullerenes are also called buckyballs .
Buckminsterfullerene (60C) contains nearly spherical 60C molecules
with the shape of a soccer ball.
Fullerene , 60C molecule contains 12 pentagonal and 20 hexagonal
faces on its soccer ball shape, and each carbon atom has sp2 hybridized
orbitals.
Fullerenes are under study for potential medicinal use - such as specific
antibiotics to target resistant bacteria and even target certain cancer cells
such as melanoma.
Nanotubes
Nanotubes are another allotropic
form of carbon discovered in 1991by
Sumio li jima . Nano tubes consist of
hexagonal arrays of covalently bonded
carbon atoms, similar to the sheets in
graphite. Unlike the flat graphite sheets,
in nanotubes the sheets are rolled into
cylinders. Due to this reason they are
called nanotubes. Nanotubes like
graphite, are electrical conductors and canbe used as molecular wires. In integrated
circuits nanotubes are used instead of
copper to connect the componentstogether. Scientists inserted
biomolecules into nanotubes to inject
them into a single cell.
Buckminsterfullerene (60C) 3D structure of Buckminsterfullerene (60C)
 Single-walled carbon
nanotube or Buckytube
Carbon and its Compounds 312 X ClassVersatile nature of carbon
By the eighteenth century scientists tried to explain the difference
between the compounds in a broader way.
J. J. Berzelius (1807) named the compounds that derived from living
organism as organic compounds and those from non-living materials as
inorganic compounds. He thought that organic compounds would beprepared in the living bodies through vital force, the essence of life. As
this force is absent outside the living bodies, it was thought that the so
called organic compounds could not be synthesized in the laboratories.
Surprisingly F . Wohler (1828) produced an organic compound Urea
in the laboratory by heating an inorganic salt ammonium cyanate.
NH4CNO
Ammonium
cyanateH
heatHNCO
N
HH
Urea
Do you know?
Graphene  - The new wonder material:
As its name indicates, graphene is extracted from graphite, the material used
in pencils. Like graphite, graphene is entirely composed of carbon atoms. For a
thickness of 1mm graphite contains some 3 million layers of graphene. The
carbons are perfectly distributed in a hexagonal honeycomb formation only in0.3 nanometers thickness.
Graphene conducts electricity better than copper. It is 200 times stronger
than steel but six times lighter. It is almost perfectly transparent to light.
3D illustration showing a sheet of
grapheneA piece of graphene aerogel - weighing
only 0.16 milligrams per cubic
centimeter - is placed on a flower.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 313It inspired many other chemists and they were successful to prepare
the so called organic compounds, methane, acetic acid etc., in the
laboratory. This gave a death blow to the idea that organic compounds are
derived from living organism. Chemists thought about a new definition
for organic compounds. After observing the structures and elements oforganic compounds, they defined organic compounds as compounds of
carbon. Therefore, organic chemistry is totally allotted to carbon
compounds.
•Allotting completely one special branch in chemistry to compounds
of only one element. Is it justified when there are so many elementsand their compounds but not with any special branches?
 We understand that all molecules that make life possible –
carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, hormones, and vitamins
contain carbon. The chemical reactions that take place in living systems
are of carbon compounds. Food that we get from nature, various medicines,cotton, silk and fuels like natural gas and petroleum almost all of them are
carbon compounds. Synthetic fabrics, plastics, synthetic rubber are also
compounds of carbon. Hence, carbon is a special element with the largestnumber of compounds.
Catenation
Another peculiar behaviour of carbon is its ability to form longest
chains with its own atoms. If any element forms bonds between its own
atoms to give big molecules we call that property as catenation property.Carbon has the ability to form longest chains containing millions of carbon
atoms in molecules like some proteins. Sulphur, phosphorus and some
other non metals have this property but to a very less extent.Wöhler Friedrich (1800 – 1882)
German chemist who was a student of Berzelius. In
attempting to prepare ammonium cyanate from silver cyanide
and ammonium chloride, he accidentally synthesized urea in
1828. This was the first organic synthesis, and shatteredthe vitalism theory. 
Wöhler pursued the matter further and discovered that urea
and ammonium cyanate had the same chemical formula, but
very different chemical properties. This was an early discovery of isomerism, sinceurea has the formula CO(NH
2)2 and ammonium cyanate has the formula NH4CNO.

Carbon and its Compounds 314 X ClassYou have understood  that carbon can form:
a) Four single covalent bonds ,
b) A double bond and two single covalent bond s   (                    )
c) A single covalent bond and a triple bond (–C
 C), or two double
bonds (C = C = C) with its own atoms or atoms of other elements – to
satisfy its tetravalency.
This ability of carbon to form bonds in so many ways made it as
versatile element in nature. Hence, carbon’s ability 1) to form largest
number of compounds 2) to show catenation 3) to form various types of
bonds made it the versatile element.
Hydrocarbons
•What are hydrocarbons?
The compounds containing only carbon and hydrogen in their molecules
are called hydrocarbons .
Hydrocarbons are classified into two categories known as open chain
hydrocarbons and closed chain hydrocarbons. Open chain hydrocarbons
are also called aliphatic hydrocarbons or acyclic hydrocarbons.
Open and closed chain hydrocarbons
Let us observe the following structural formulae of different
hydrocarbons.
1) CH3–CH2–CH2–CH2–CH3  n-pentane, a straight chain compound
2) CH3–CH–CH2–CH3.   Iso pentane, a branched chain compound
                 |
               CH3
3) CH2   –  CH2     cyclo pentane, a cyclic compound or a ring compound
 |                    |
CH2       CH2  \           /
       CH2
•Do all the above compounds have equal number of C and H atoms?
In the first example you will notice that all carbons are linked to one
another resulting a  linear structure, where as in the second example four
carbons are linked in linear way and the fifth carbon is linked to the parent
chain resulting a branch. In the third example we find that carbon chain is
closed to form a ring. So, it is a closed chain hydrocarbon or ring
hydrocarbon.H CH
H
H
CC
Free distribution by A.P. Government 315All hydrocarbons (both Aliphatic and cyclic hydrocarbons) are again
classified as Alkanes, Alkenes and Alkynes:
1) Hydrocarbons containing only single bonds between carbon atoms are
called Alkanes .
2) Hydrocarbons containing atleast one double bond between carbon
atoms are called Alkenes,  and
3) Hydrocarbons containing atleast one triple between carbon atoms are
called Alkynes .
Saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbons
The hydrocarbons containing only C –C single bonds are known as
saturated hydrocarbons. All alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons. The
hydrocarbons that contain at least one double bond (C=C) or contain atleast
one triple bond (C  
 C) between the two carbon atoms are called
unsaturated hydrocarbons . Alkenes and Alkynes are the examples for
unsaturated hydrocarbons.
Straight chain, branched chain and closed chain hydro carbon
compounds may be saturated or unsaturated. See the following examples.
1) Which of the following compounds are unsaturated? Justify your
answer.a. CH
3–CH2–CH3b. CH3 – CH = CH2
c. CH  – CH2d. HC  
 C – CH = CH2  ||         |
      CH –  CH2
e. CH3 – CH – CH= CH2      f.  CH3–CH2– CH2– CH2|                                                                 |
CH3                                                                              CH2 – CH3
2) Identify the compounds in the following, as branched chain and closed
chain compounds.
(a) CH3 – CH  – CH – CH3         (b)             CH2 – CH2 | |                    |       |
CH3    CH2 – CH3          H3C – CH  – CH2
             CH3                          |
(c)CH   –  CH2(d)  HC  
 C – C – CH3 ||               |   |
CH       CH2                             CH3  \           /      CH
2
Carbon and its Compounds 316 X ClassBinding of carbon with other elements
We have understood that the compounds of carbon and hydrogen are
called hydrocarbons.
•Can carbon form bonds with the atoms of other elements?
Practical observations reveal that carbon forms compounds not only
with atoms of hydrogen but also with atoms of other elements like oxygen,
nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus,  halogens etc.
Let us see the compounds of carbon with other elements.
Carbon compounds with C, H, X.
•Compounds containing C, H, X where ‘X’ represents halogens (C l, Br,
I atoms).
Eg: CH3Cl, CH3– CH2–Br, CH2Cl – CH2I, CH3 – CHC l2
These are known as halogen derivatives  of hydrocarbons or halo
hydrocarbons.
Carbon compounds with C, H, O.
•Compounds containing C, H, O are of different types:
Alcohols
If a hydrogen atom of H2O molecule is replaced by ‘R’ we get alcohols
R-OH.
The hydrocarbons that contain –OH group are called alcohols. Observe
the following examples:
  CH3OH, CH3CH2OH, CH3-CHOH-CH3 etc.
General formula of alcohols is R – OH  where ‘ R’ is alkyl  group, CnH2n+1.
 Aldehydes
The hydrocarbons with functional group –CHO are called aldehydes.
Observe the following examples:
 H – C = O, CH3 – C = O, CH3 – CH2 - C = O  etc.
         |                      |                                 |
        H                    H                               H
    Formaldehyde           Acetaldehyde                         Propionaldehyde
General formula of aldehydes is R – CHO , where R = alkyl group or
hydrogen and -CHO is functional group.
Ketones
The hydrocarbons with                       functional group are called ketones.
                                O                                       O
                                 ||                                        ||
CH3 – C – CH3,   CH3 –  CH2 – C – CH3 etc.
        Di methyl ketone                     ethyl methyl ketone
                   group is known as Ketone group (common system)COC
C
COCC
Free distribution by A.P. Government 317General formula of Ketones is
R and R1 are alkyl groups which may be same or different.
Carboxylic acids
The general molecular formula of carboxylic acid is R – COOH ,
where R is an alkyl group or H atom.
H – C = O,           CH3 – C = O, CH3 – CH2– C = O,
        |                                |                                  |
       OH                           OH                             OH
    Formic acid           Acetic acid         Propionic acid
       – C = O  group is called the carboxyl group .
           |
        OH
Ethers
Ethers are carbon compounds related to H2O in such a way that both
hydrogen atoms are replaced by two alkyl groups which may be same or
different.
Eg: CH3 – O – CH3 , CH3 – CH2 – O – CH3, CH2 = CH – O – CH3 etc.
               Di methyl ether                 ethyl methyl ether  methyl vinyl ether
Esters
These compounds are derivatives of carboxylic acids. If the hydrogen
atom of  - COOH  gets replaced by ‘R’, the alkyl group esters are obtained.
          O                                     O                                       O
           ||                                       ||                                        ||
CH3 - C - OCH3, CH3 -  CH2 – C - OCH3 ,  CH3 -  CH2 – C – OCH2CH3 etc.
Di methyl ester ethyl methyl ester Di ethyl ester
Compounds containing C, H, N
Amines                                                                  NH2
                                                                                          |
Eg: CH3–NH2, CH3–CH–NH2,  CH3CH2NH2,  CH3–CH2–C–CH3     etc.
                             | |
                            CH3           CH3
 - NH2 group is called amine group . We may compare amines to NH3
as we have done ROH and  R – O – R/  to H2O.
If one hydrogen atom is replaced from NH3 by an alkyl group we get
the so called primary amines . If two hydrogen atoms of NH3 are replaced
by two alkyl groups (same or different) we get secondary amines and if
all the three hydrogen atoms are replaced by the same or different alkyl
groups we get tertiary amines .COR
R/
Carbon and its Compounds 318 X ClassEg:
Functional groups in carbon compounds
The characteristic properties of an organic compound depend mainly
on an atom or group of atoms in its molecule known as the functional
group .
Organic compounds are classified by the type of functional group they
contain. Functional groups are responsible for the behavior of the organic
compounds. Compounds containing the same functional group undergo
similar types of reactions.
Isomerism
Observe the following two structures:
(a)  CH3–CH2–CH2–CH3           (b)   CH3–CH–CH3     |
                                                                      CH3
•How about their structures? Are they same?
•How many carbon and hydrogen atoms are there in (a) and (b) structures?
•Write the condensed molecular formulae for (a) and (b).Do they have
same molecular formulae?
(Take the help of your teacher and name the compounds mentioned in
the above examples).
The first one is called butane  (or)  in the common system it is known
as n-butane.
The second one is called 2-methyl propane  or iso-butane in the
common system .
We find both of these compounds in nature. They have different
properties due to the difference in their structures. Compounds of this
type which have the same molecular formula but different properties are
called isomers .
The phenomenon of possessing same molecular formula but different
properties by the compounds is known as isomerism. The compounds that
exhibit isomerism are called  isomers .
(iso =  same ; meros =  part,  i.e., they have same molecular formula)
In the above example isomerism is due to the difference in the
structures. Therefore, it is called the structural isomerism.
Try to draw different structures for the following carbon compounds
and name the isomers of each (Take the help of your teacher)
(a) C5H12   (b) C6H14CH3   NH
H3CCH3   N
H3CCH3
(secondary amine)
 N-methyl methanamine(Tertiary amine)N,N-di methyl methanamine
Free distribution by A.P. Government 319Homologous series
Till now we have classified Organic compounds on the basis of carbon
chains and functional groups. There is another classification based on
Homologous series.
The series of carbon compounds in which two successive compounds
differ by –CH2 unit is called homologous series .
Eg: 1) CH4, C2H6, C3H8 …
2) CH3OH, C2H5OH, C3H7OH …
If you observe above series of compounds, you will notice that each
compound in the series differs by –CH2 unit by its successive compound.
Homologous series of organic compounds have following
characteristic features.
1) They have one general formula.
Eg: alkanes (CnH2n+2); alkynes(CnH2n-2); alcohols (CnH2n+1)OH etc.
2) Successive compounds in the series possess a difference of (-CH2)
unit.
3) They possess similar chemical properties due to the same functional
group
Eg: alcohols, aldehydes and carboxylic acids have functional groups
C–OH,  C–CHO and C-COOH respectively.
4) They show a regular gradation in their physical properties (see the
table-1).
For example: we may take alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, alcohols,
aldehydes, and carboxylic acids etc. as homologous series. The individual
members of a homologous series are called homologs.
Observe the following tables 1, 2 and 3. They represent three different
homologous series.
Table-1: Homologous series of Alkanes
The general formula of this homologous series Alkanes  is CnH2n+2, where
n = 1,2,3...Alkane Molecular
formula
Methane CH4H-CH2-H 1 –164 –183 0.55
Ethane C2H6H-(CH2)2-H 2 –89 –183 0.51
Propane C3H8H-(CH2)3-H 3 –42 –189 0.50
Butane C4H10H-(CH2)4-H 4   0 –138 0.58
Pentane C5H12H-(CH2)5-H 5  36 –136 0.63StructureNo. of
carbonsBoiling
Point (oC)Melting
Point (oC)Density
(gml -1at20oC)
Carbon and its Compounds 320 X ClassTable-2:Homologous series of Alkenes
Alkenes have general molecular formula CnH2n, where ‘n’ is 2, 3, 4, …
Table-3: Homologous series of Alkynes
Alkynes have general molecular formula CnH2n-2, where ‘n’ is 2, 3, 4, …
Nomenclature of organic compounds
We have millions of organic compounds. As number of organic
compound is very big it is difficult to remember their names individually.
To overcome this problem they have to be properly named. For this, the
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) had been
formed, and one of its responsibilities is to name the organic and inorganic
compounds in a systematic order. The basic idea behind the systematicnomenclature is that there should be only one name for the given structure
throughout the world and also there should be only one structure for the
given name.
The IUPAC name of an organic compound gives information about:a) The number of carbon atoms present in the molecules we call this part
of the name as word root.
 C
1 - Meth; C2 - eth; C3 - prop; C4 - but ;     C5-pent; C6 - hex;
 C7 - hept; C8-oct; C9-non; C10 - dec     and so on.
b) The substituents in the molecule ; which are shown as the prefix
c) The functional group in the molecule; which is shown as the suffix .
Prefix:  Prefix again has several parts known as primary prefix
secondary prefix, numerical prefix and number prefix etc.
Primary prefix is ‘cyclo’ and it is useful only for cyclic compounds
which have properties similar to aliphatic compounds. If the compounds
are not cyclic, this part of the name is absent.Alkane No. of Carbons Structure Formula
Ethene 2 CH2 =CH2C2H4
Propene 3 CH3-CH=CH2C3H6
Butene 4 CH3-CH2-CH=CH2C4H8
Pentene 5 CH3-CH2-CH2-CH=CH2C5H10
Alkane No. of Carbons Structure Formula
Ethyne 2 HC =_    CH C2H2
Propyne 3 CH3- C =_    CH C3H4
Butyne 4 CH3-H2C-C =_   CH C4H6
Pentyne 5 CH3-CH2-CH2-C =_   CH C5H8
Free distribution by A.P. Government 321Secondary prefix  tells about the second grade functional groups known
as substituents. They are ‘halogens’ which are written as halo; alkyl
groups(R), alkoxy groups(-OR) etc. which are written as alkyl, alkoxy.
Suffix:  It also contains several parts known as primary suffix,
secondary suffix, numerical suffix and number suffix etc.
Primary suffix  tells about the saturation of the compound. For
saturated (C-C) it is ‘ an’ and carbon atoms are attached to one another
only through single bonds in the compounds.
For unsaturated (C=C) double bonded compounds it is ‘ en’ and for
unsaturated triple bonded (C 
  C ) compounds it is ‘ yn’.
There is a  Secondary suffix  that tells about the functional groups with
the particular term.
For example: For hydrocarbons it is ‘ e’
for Alcohols it is ‘ –ol ’
Aldehydes it is ‘ –al ‘
Ketones it is ‘ –one  ‘ and
Carboxylic acid it is ‘ –oic acid’
Numerical prefixes  like di, tri are written before the secondary
prefixes, primary suffixes and secondary suffixes, when the same
substituent, multiple bond or functional group is repeated twice, thriceetc., as di, tri etc respectively.
Number s are written to tell about to which carbon atoms of the
compound the substituent(s), multiple bond(s) or functional group(s) are
attached.
The following order is to be followed while naming  carbon compound.
The order is as follows:
What differences among (1), (2), (3); (6), (7), (8) and (9), (10) and
(11) do you find?
(1), (2) are numbers and numerical designations to be written for
secondary prefixes (3) which tell about the position and repetitions of
second grade functional groups known as substituents respectively.
1          2         3          4
Eg: CH3–CH–CH–CH3     2, 3 – di   chloro   but     an      e
          |       |    (1)        (2)         (3)         (5)         (8)      (11)
                          C l     ClNumbers - Numerical Prefixes – Secondary Prefix – Primary Prefix - Word Root – Numbers
         1                           2                                           3                              4                                 5                    6
-Numerical Prefix, Primary Suffix, numbers, numerical Prefixes and Secondary Suffixes.
            7                                   8                           9                              10                                         11
Carbon and its Compounds 322 X Class (6) and (7) tell about the positions and repetitions of the multiple
bonds in the structures of the molecule of the compound. These are related
to the primary suffix (8) that tells about the unsaturation.
              5        4       3        2          1
Eg: CH3-C=CH-CH  
CH       but –  3  – ene –   1  –  yn –      e
         (5)       (6)        (8)          (9)        (8)           (11)
(9) and (10) tell about the positions and repetitions of the functional
group or principal functional group (11) in a poly functional compound. It
gives the information which carbon represents it or to which carbon thatfunctional group is attached and how many times it is repeated. If it comes
only once we need not write mono  i.e., if no numerical prefix is present it
is understood that the functional group is not repeated. Similarly, in the
names of aliphatic compounds word root (5), primary suffix (8) and
secondary suffix (11)   are definitely present and all others may or may
not be present.
Eg:        CH
3-CH2-CH-CH2-OH but     ane – 1,2 –     di     ol
                                |   (5)         (8)         (9)           (10)    (11)
              OH
Punctuation : Numbers are separated by comma (,) and numbers &
designations by hyphen(-)
If you find more than one substituent in the structure you have to follow
alphabetical order while naming them. For this numerical prefixes should
not be considered. Substituents: X (halo), R (alkyl), -OR (alkoxy),
-NO2 (nitro), NO (nitroso) etc.
If you find more than one functional group in the structure you select
the principal functional group and write it as secondary suffix. All other
functional groups become substituents.
A decreasing order of priority for choosing and naming a principal
characteristic group. This should be written as secondary suffix.
Activity 1
Observe the names of the following compounds. Give reasons in the
space provided.
Divide the given name as per the notations given above and identify the
parts in the name through the numbers given above from (1) to (11) and
write them in your note book.
(Take the help of your teacher)                -COOH > (CH3CO)2O > -COOR >   -COX    >  - CONH2  >  -CN   >  -CHO  >  >C=O >   R-OH    >  -NH2
     Acid        anhydride          ester       acid halide       amide         nitrile    aldehydes     ketones    alcohols    amines
Free distribution by A.P. Government 323One example is given to guide you in dividing the name as per notation.
vCH3–CH2–CH2–CH3: Butane   ..................................................
 4         3          2        1
vCH3–CH2–CH=CH2: But-1-ene ..............................................
          1           2        3          4
vCH3–CH–CH2–CH3: 2-Chloro butane ...................................
     |
                     Cl
          1           2        3        4
vCH3–CH–CH–CH3: 2,3 – dichloro butane ...........................
                        |      |
                     Cl     Cl
 4          3        2         1
vCH3–CH=CH=CH2: Buta 1, 2- diene ....................................
 4          3          2        1
vCH3–CH2–CH2–CH2–OH  : Butan – 1 – ol ......................................
 4          3          2        1
vCH3–CH2–CH2–CHO : Butanal ...................................................
vCH3–CH2–CH2–COOH  : Butanoic acid.......................................
vCH2–CH2: Cyclo butane...........................................
 |         |
CH2–CH2
vBr     Br : 1,2 – di bromo cyclo butane .................
 |        |
CH– CH
 |        |
CH2–CH2
vCH2–CH–CHO : 2,3 – di chloro propanal ........................
 |        | solution:
Cl     Cl
vCH3–C–CH2–CH2–CH3  : Penta n – 2 - one .................................
     ||
          O2,3 - di  chloro prop  an   al
  (1)      (2)     (3)           (5)      (8)    (11)
Carbon and its Compounds 324 X ClassNumbering carbon atoms
1) We can number carbon atoms from left to right or from right to
left so that sum of the numbers indicating the positions of substituents
and functional groups should be minimum possible.
2) The functional group carbon should be given the lowest number
even if it does not obey Rule (1).
3) The carbon atoms of the chain terminating functional group say
–CHO, or –COOH groups should be given always number ‘1’ even if it
does not obey Rules (1) & (2).
Table -4:
NOTE: (C) designates a carbon atom included in the name of the parent
hydride and does not belong to a group designated by a suffix or a prefix.
Example: CH3–CH2–CHO propanal - (C) of CHO included in the
name of the main chain.
 CH3–CH–COOH 2- formyl propanoic acid - ‘C’ of CHO
           | not included in the name of main
          CHO (parent) chain.Class Formula Prefix SuffixSuffixes and prefixes for some important characteristic functional groups:
Acid halides -COX halocarbonyl carbonyl halide
(Where X is halogen atom)
-(C)O-X oyl halide
Alcohols -OH hydroxy ol
Aldehydes -CHO formyl carbaldehyde
-(C)HO oxo -al
Amides -CONH2carbamoyl carboxamide
-(C)ONH2oxo -al
Amines -NH2amino amine
Carboxylic acids -COOH carboxy carboxylic acid
-(C)OOH oic acid
Ethers -OR (R)oxy
Esters -COOR oxycarbonyl (R)…carboxylate
(C)OOR R - oxycarbonyl (R)… oate
Ketones -C = O oxo -one
Nitriles -CN cyano -carbonytrile
-(C)N Nitrile
Free distribution by A.P. Government 325Example-1:  CH3CH2OH
Principal functional group :  -OH    (-ol)
Parent hydride        :  CH3 – CH3
Parent hydride  +  one Principal functional group  J  CH3CH2OH
Name of the compound  J  Eth  an    ol
 (5)     (8)     (11)
Example-2: OH      OH
                        |           |
                 CH2  –  CH2
Parent hydride  +  two Principal functional groups  J  OH        OH
     |       |
Name of the compound  J  eth ane – 1,2 –  di    ol     CH2 –   CH2
           (5)    (8)         (9)      (10)   (11)
             O
 ||
Example-3: CH3-C-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-OH
Principal functional group  >(C) = O    -one
Parent hydride  CH3-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH3   Heptane
Parent hydride  +  Principal functional group
                  O
                   ||
        7          6         5         4         3        2     1CH3-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-C-CH3   Heptan -2-one
Substituent  -OH  J    hydroxy
     O
                  ||
  OH-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2 -C-CH3
Name of the compound  7     –   hydroxy    hept    ane   –   2   –   one––  ––––––     –––   ––––     ––      ––––                (1)          (3)                (5)        (8)            (9)           (11)
Note:  In the solution the principal functional group >C=O (Keto) group
is given more priority than to –OH (alcohol).
Example-4: CH2 = CH – CH2 – CH –CH3      |
     OH
Parent hydride  CH3 – CH2 – CH2 – CH2 – CH3     Pentane
Principal functional group  -OH -ol
Principal hydride  +  Principal functions                Pentan – 2 – ol
Subtractive modification   (-2H) -en
Name of the compound:   Pent  -  4  -  en  -  2  -  ol
          (5)          (6)       (8)       (9)      (11)
Carbon and its Compounds 326 X Class           Cl
       8               7      6          5  |           4            3           2             1
Example-5:  CH2 = C = CH  – CH –CH2 – CH2 – CH – CH2|       |          |
           C l    OH    OH
       5,6  –   di     chloro  –  octa    –  6,7    –  di   en   –  1,2   –  di      ol       –––      ––    –––––       ––––     –––       ––   ––      –––     –––   –––           (1)            (2)         (3)                  (5)             (6)             (7)      (8)         (9)           ( 10)       (11)
Example-6:
        2,3  –   di    methyl –  cyclo     hex     an   –    1    –    ol       –––      ––    –––––      ––––     –––    ––       ––        –––           (1)          (2)           (3)                  (4)            (5)         (8)           (9)           (11)
•Can we write the structure of a compound if the name of the compound
is given?
Yes, we can write the structures from the name of the compound as
follows:
1) From the word root in the name write the carbon atoms in the main
chain
2) Select counting of carbon atoms in the appropriate manner from left
to right or right to left as for the name given.
3) Attach the substituent at respective numbers of carbon atoms as per
their numbers and numerical designations.
4) Write the functional groups formulae as per the name at the respective
carbon atom.
5) Keeping in view that the tetravalency of each carbon atom has to be
satisfied use hydrogen atoms in the required number.
Examples:
1) 2–methyl pentan–3–ol       2) 2–bromo–3–ethyl penta–1,4–diene
3) 3–bromo–2–chloro–5–oxohexanoic acid4) 3–amino–2–bromo hexan–1–ol
5)  3, 4–dichloro but–1–ene
              |          |
Solution : 1. CH
3 - CH2 - CH2 - CH2 - CH3 ;  CH3 - CH2 - CH2 - CH2 - CH3
      2.  H2C = C - C -   C = CH2OH
CH3
CH31
2
3
456
CH3OH
  1   2   3   4   5
H
Br     CH2    H
     CH3
Free distribution by A.P. Government 327Chemical properties of carbon compounds
Though we have millions of organic compounds, the reactions they
undergo are limited. Some important reactions among them are discussed
here.
They are:
1) Combustion 2)  Oxidation  reactions
3) Addition reactions 4)  Substitution reactions
1. Combustion reactions
Carbon, and its compounds burn in presence of oxygen or air to give
CO2, heat and light.
The process of burning of carbon or carbon compound in excess of
oxygen to give heat and light is called the combustion reaction.  In the
reactions carbon is in its maximum oxidation state of 4+ in the product.
Eg: 1) C  +   O2 J CO2 + Energy
       2) 2C2H6  + 7O2  J 4CO2 + 6H2O  + Energy
       3) CH3CH2OH  + 3O2  J CO2 + 3H2O  + Energy
Generally, saturated hydrocarbons burn with a clear light blue flame,
whereas unsaturated hydrocarbons burn with yellow flame with soot
(carbon). If air is not sufficiently available during combustion, evensaturated hydrocarbons give sooty flame. When Coal, Petroleum etc., burnin air they give oxides of sulphur and nitrogen in addition to CO
2 and H2O
which pollute the environment. When Coal or Charcoal is burnt sometimes
they just glow red without flame. This is because to get a flame gaseous
fuels should burn.
Most of the aromatic compounds burn with sooty flame.
•Why do sometimes cooking vessels get blackened on a gas or kerosene
stove?
Because of the inlets of air getting closed, the fuel gases donot
completely undergo combustion. Hence, it forms a sooty carbon form
which gets coated over the vessels.
A combustion reaction is generally defined as any reaction that sustains
a flame. It usually involves burning with oxygen, though some exceptionsare there, combustion reaction is always exothermic, that is energy isliberated during combustion reaction.
2. Oxidation reactions
Though combustion is generally oxidation reaction, all oxidation
reactions are not combustion reactions. Oxidation reactions may be carried
out using oxidizing agents. Oxidizing agents  or Oxidants  are substances
that oxidize other substances. They themselves undergo reduction.
Carbon and its Compounds 328 X ClassEg: Alkaline Potassium permanganate or Acidified Potassium
dichromate in solutions act as oxidizing agents and supplies oxygen to
convert alcohols into carboxylic acids.
Ethyl alcohol undergoes oxidation to form the product Acetaldehyde
and finally Acetic acid. (see following equation)
3. Addition reactions
Unsaturated organic compounds that contain multiple bonds
(=, 
   bonds) like alkenes and alkynes undergo addition reactions to become
saturated. During the reactions addition of the reagent takes place at the
double bonded or triple bonded carbon atoms.
In the above reactions ‘Ni’ acts as ‘catalyst.’
•Do you know what is a ’catalyst’?
A catalyst is a substance which regulates (increase/decrease) the rate
of a given reaction without itself finally undergoing any chemical change.
These reactions are commonly used in the hydrogenation of vegetable
oils using nickel as catalyst. Vegetable oils generally have long unsaturated
carbon chains, while animal fats have saturated carbon chains.
Fats and oils are both of fatty acids. Oils are generally liquids at room
temperature due to unsaturated fatty acids but fats are solids due to saturatedfatty acids.
4. Substitution reactions
A reaction in which an atom or a group of atoms in a given compound
is replaced by other atom or group of atoms is called a substitution reaction.
Alkanes, the saturated hydrocarbons are chemically least reactive.
Therefore they are also called paraffins (parum = little; affins = affinity,
Think and discuss
•Why we are advised not to use animal fats for cooking?
•Which oil is recommended for cooking? Why?CH3CH2OHalkaline KMnO4+Heat
Ethanol
(Ethyl alcohol)CH3CHO
Ethanal
(Acetadehyde)CH3COOH
Ethanoic acid
(Acetic Acid)acidified K2Cr2O7+Heat
CH3C =_    C–CH3Ni catalyst
But–2-yneCH3CH=CH–CH3CH3–CH2–CH2–CH3
But–2-eneNi catalyst
ButaneH2H2
Free distribution by A.P. Government 329i.e., no affinity towards chemical changes ). However they undergo some
chemical changes under suitable conditions which are substitution
reactions.
For example, methane (CH4) reacts with chlorine in the presence of
sunlight. Hydrogen atoms of CH4 are replaced by chlorine atoms.
CH4           +  C l2               CH3Cl          +     HC l
Methane              Methyl Chloride      Hydrogen Chloride
CH3Cl       +  C l2            CH2Cl2         +     HC l
Methyl Chloride Methylene Chloride       Hydrogen Chloride
CH2Cl2      +  C l2            CHC l3           +    HC l
Methylene Chloride Chloroform                  Hydrogen Chloride
CHC l3       +  C l2            CC l4             +    HC l
Chloroform                Carbon     Hydrogen Chloride
Tetrachloride
Some important carbon compounds
Many carbon compounds are invaluable to us. But here we study, the
properties of  Ethanol (Ethyl alcohol) and Ethanoic acid (Acetic acid)which are two very important carbon compounds.
Ethanol (Ethyl alcohol)
Preparation: Ethanol is prepared on large scale from ethene by the
addition of water vapour to it in the presence of catalysts like P2O5 ,
Tungsten oxide at high pressure and temperature.
CH2 = CH2  + H2O         CH3CH2OH
          ethene         100-300 atm                ethyl alcohol
                                                  At 300 oC
Grains such as corn, wheat, barley are common sources for ethanol.
Therefore, it is also called grain alcohol.
Cooking grain  +  sprouted barley J  glucose                    ethanol  +  CO2
(starch)                           (called Malt)                                          enzymes
The process of conversion of starches and sugars to C2H5OH is called
fermentation process .
Properties
Ethanol is a colourless liquid with characteristic sweet odour. Pure
ethanol boils at 78.3 oC. Pure ethanol is called absolute (100 %) alcohol .
Denatured alcohol is ethanol that contains impurities that make it
undrinkable. The impurities are methanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, aviationgasoline etc. It is toxic and 200 ml of it is a fatal dose to an adult. Solution
of about 10% ethanol in gasoline (gasohol) is a good motor fuel.catalyst
yeastsunlight
sunlight
sunlight
sunlight
Carbon and its Compounds 330 X ClassEthanol is commonly called alcohol and is active ingredient of all
alcoholic drinks. Consumption of small quantity of dilute ethanol causes
drunkenness. In addition, as it is a good solvent it is also used in medicinessuch as tincture iodine, cough syrups and many tonics
•Do you know how the police detect whether suspected drivers have
consumed alcohol or not?
As ethanol is similar to water molecule (H
2O) with C2H5 group in place
of hydrogen, it reacts with metallic sodium to liberate hydrogen and form
sodium ethoxide .
2C2H5OH  +  2Na  J  2C2H5ONa  +  H2
Ethanol              sodium ethoxide
Action of conc. H2SO4:  Ethanol reacts with conc. H2SO4 at about
170oC (443 K) to give ethene. It is a dehydration reaction. H2SO4 is a
dehydrating agent and removes H2O.
CH3CH2OH CH2 = CH2  +  H2O
Conc.H2SO4
Ethanoic acid (Acetic acid, CH3COOH)
Ethanoic acid is a colourless liquid with characteristic unpleasant odour.
It is soluble in water and more acidic than H2O or ethanol, but less acidic
than mineral acids.
Ethanoic acid is commonly called as acetic acid. 5-8% solution of
acetic acid in water is called vinegar and is used widely as a preservative in
pickles.at 170oCThe police officer asks the suspect to blow air into a plastic
bag through a mouth piece of the detecting instrument which
contains crystals of potassium-di-chromate (K2Cr2O7). As
K2Cr2O7 is a good oxidizing agent, it oxidizes any ethanol in the
driver’s breath to ethanal and ethanoic acid.
Orange Cr2O72- changes to bluish green Cr3+ during the process
of the oxidation of alcohol. The length of the tube that turned intogreen is the measure of the quantity of alcohol that had been drunk.Now a days police are using even an electronic instrumentcontaining small fuel cell that measures the electrical signal
produced when ethanol in the breath is oxidized.
The police even use the IR Spectra to detect the bonds
C – OH and   C – H of CH
3 – CH2OH.

Free distribution by A.P. Government 331Chemical properties
Acidity: (Reaction with metals and alkalies)
1) Ethanoic acid reacts with active metals like Na to liberate hydrogen.
This reaction is similar to that of ethanol.
2CH3COOH  +  2Na  J  2CH3COONa  +  H2
acetic acid              sodium     sodium acetate
2) Ethanoic acid reacts with NaOH to form salt and water.
CH3COOH  +  NaOH     J  2CH3COONa  +  H2O
       sodium hydroxide
3) Ethanoic acid reacts with sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogen
carbonate which are weaker bases and liberates CO2.
2CH3COONa  +  Na2CO3       J 2CH3COONa  +  H2O  +  CO2
              Sodium carbonate
CH3COOH  +  NaHCO3      J   CH3COONa  +  H2O  +  CO2
          sodium bi carbonate
The strength of acids may be expressed in terms of their pKa values.
These values are related to their dissociation in aqueous solutions.
Note that pKa of 1.0M HC l is zero but pKa of CH3COOH is 4.76.
pKa values are useful to tell about acid strength. Strong acids have pKa  <
1, acids with pKa between 1 and 5 are moderately strong and weak acids
have pKa between 5 and 15. The weakest acids have     pKa > 15.
Note that pKa values less than zero are not generally given as they are
of no use to give in terms of pKa. They may be directly given in terms of
Ka.
4)  Esterification Reactions
•     What are esters?
Esters contain the functional group
 and the general  formula is R – COO - R/ . R and R/  are alkyl groups
or phenyl groups .What is pKa?
pKa is the negative value of logarithm of dissociation constant of an acid.
pKa is a measure of how much an acid dissociates in a solution. 
pKa = -log10Ka
The  lower the pKa value, the stronger is the acid.
C CO
O–C
Carbon and its Compounds 332 X ClassActivity -2
Take 1 ml of ethanol (absolute alcohol) and 1ml of
glacial acetic acid along with a few drops of concentrated
sulphuric acid in a test tube.
Warm it in a water-bath or a beaker containing water
for at least five minutes as shown in Fig.
Pour the warm contents into a beaker containing
20-50 ml of water and observe the odour of the resulting
mixture.
• What do you notice?
You will notice that the resulting mixture is a sweet
odoured substance. This substance is nothing but ethyl acetate, an ester.
The reaction in activity – 2 is called esterification reaction .
Esterification
The reaction between carboxylic acid and an alcohol in the presence
of conc. H2SO4 to form a sweet odoured substance, ester with the functional
group                      is called esterification .
The esterification reaction is slow and reversible.
The equation for the reaction between an acid RCOOH and an alcohol
R/OH
(where  R and R/ can be the same or different) is:
So, for example, if you want to prepare ethyl ethanoate or ethyl acitate
from ethanoic acid and ethanol, the equation would be:
Ethanoic acid        Ethanol                                                             ethyl acetate
(acetic acid)                 (ethyl alcohol)C CO
O–C
O–H+  R/OH R – C
O–R/+  H2OOO
R–C    Activity 2
Test
tube
containing
reaction
mixture
Water Beaker
Wire
gauze
Tripod
standBurner
Formation of ester
CH3–C
O–H+  CH3CH2OHO
CH3–C
O–CH2CH3+  H2OO conc.H2SO4
Free distribution by A.P. Government 333Soaps – Saponification and Micelles
Do you know what ‘soap’ is?
Soap is a sodium or potassium salt of a higher fatty acid like palmitic
acid (C15H31COOH), stearic acid (C17H35COOH), oleic acid
(C17H33COOH) etc. The formula of a soap in general is RCOONa  or
RCOOK, where R = C15H31 ; C17H35 etc.
Fats are esters of higher fatty acids and the trihydroxy alcohol known
as glycerol.
CH2OH
                              |
Glycerol is CHOH   , propane – 1, 2, 3 – triol.
                              |
                              CH2OH
When fats are treated with sodium hydroxide, sodium salts the fatty
acids and glycerol is formed. The sodium salts of these higher fatty acids
being soaps the reaction is the soap formation reaction which is generally
called as ‘saponification reaction’.
                  O
                   ||
CH2 – O – C – C17H35                               CH2 – OH
 |                                                                  |
CH  – O – C – C17H35   + 3NaOH  J     CH  – OH           + 3 C17H35COONa
                   ||                                               |
                  O                                              CH2 – OH
CH2 – O – C – C17H35                   ||
                   O
          Tristearin                                                               glycerol                sodium stearate (soap)
Saponification reaction
Alkaline hydrolysis of tristers of higher fatty acids  producing soaps
is called saponification .
Soaps are good cleansing agents. Do you know how they do this?
For understanding this you should know about a ‘ true solution ’ and a
colloidal solution.
•What is a true solution?A true solution is that in which the solute particles dispersed in the solvent
are less than 1 nm in diameter. A colloidal solution contains the solute known
as ‘dispersed phase’ with its particles with diameters greater than 1 nm but
lesser than 1000 nm  in  the solvent known as ‘ dispersion medium ’.
Carbon and its Compounds 334 X Class
Soap is an electrolyte. When soap is put in water in very small amount
it gives low concentrated solutions. It gives true solution but, above a
particular concentration known as critical micelle concentration  (CMC),
the soap particles get aggregated and these aggregated particles are of
colloidal size known as micelles  or associated colloids.
Micelle
A spherical aggregate of soap molecules in water is called micelle .
When soap is dissolved in water, it forms a colloidal suspension in which
the soap molecules cluster together to form spherical micelles.
Formation of micelle
Activity  3
     Micelle                                   3D structure of a micelle
Take about 10 ml of water each in two test tubes.
Add a drop of oil (cooking oil) to both the test tubes and label them as
A and B.
Add a few drops of soap solution to test tube B.
Now shake both the test tubes vigorously for the same period of time.
What is that you find in them?
Can you see the oil and water layers separately in both the test tubes
immediately after
•You stop shaking them?
•Leave the test tubes undisturbed for sometime and observe. Does the
oil layer separate out?
•In which test tube does this happen first? Give your observations.
Cleansing action of soap
Suppose that we put dirty cloth in the soap solution. Dirt is mainly
greasy matter. The soap molecules are arranged radially with hydrocarbon
ends directed inwards into the greasy matter and ionic part directed outwards
into water.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 335When a dirty cloth is inserted in the solution
then the hydrocarbon part sticks to the dirt or
oil. With a little agitation the dirt particles getentrapped by the soap micelles and get
dispersed in water due to which the soap water
gets dirty and the cloth gets cleaned.
•What is the action of soap particles on the greasy cloth?
We know that soaps and detergents make oil and dirt present on the
cloth come out into  water, thereby making the cloth clean.
Soap has one polar end (the end with                carboxy) and one  non-
polar end (the end with hydrocarbon chain) as shown in the figure.
The polar end is hydrophilic in nature and this end is attracted towards
water.
The non-polar end is hydrophobic, in nature
and  it is attracted towards grease or oil on the
cloth, but not attracted towards water.
When soap is dissolved in water, its
hydrophobic ends attach themselves to dirt and
remove it from the cloth, as shown sequentiallyin the figure that follows.
•The hydrophobic end of the soap molecules
move towards the dirt or grease particle.
•The hydrophobic ends attached to the dirtparticle and try to pull out.
•The molecules of soap surround the dirtparticle at the centre of the cluster and forma spherical structure called micelle.
These micelles remain suspended in water
like particles in a colloidal solution.
The various micelles present in water do not come together to form a
precipitate as each micelle repels the other because of the ion-ion
repulsion.
Thus, the dust particles remain trapped in micelles (which remain
suspended) and are easily rinsed away with water. Hence, soap micelles
remove dirt by dissolving it in water.
A soap moleculeHydrophilic
endHydrophobic
end
 CO
O
 Representing the
cleansing action of
soap clothSoap
molecules
Soap
solution
Dirt
dirt with micelle
clean cloth
Carbon and its Compounds 336 X Class•Carbon forms a large variety of compounds. Its tetravalency and the property of catenation and
ability to form four single bonds, a double bond and two single bonds, a triple bond and a single
bond or two double bonds makes carbon versatile and brings one special branch in chemistry
for carbon compunds.
•Hydrocarbons are the compounds of carbon and hydrogen.
•Hydrocarbons are of two types – saturated hydrocarbons (alkanes) and unsaturatedhydrocarbons (alkenes and alkynes).
•Carbon forms covalent bonds with its own atoms and atoms of other elements such as hydrogen,oxygen, sulphur, nitrogen and chlorine.
•The functional groups such as alcohols, aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids bestowcharacteristic properties to the carbon compounds that contain them. Even  C = C,C  
C , give
characteristic properties.
•A group / series of hydrocarbons having same general formula, with two successive compoundspossessing difference of - CH
2 and with similar structures and similar properties (i.e., same
functional group) are called a homologous series.
•Carbon chains may be in the form of straight chains, branched chains or rings.
•Carbon compounds with identical molecular formula but different structures are called structuralisomers.
•Saturated hydrocarbons on combustion give carbon dioxide and water with the liberation ofheat.
•Unsaturated hydrocarbons undergo addition reactions while saturated hydrocarbons undergosubstitution reactions.
•Ethanol and Ethanoic acid (glacial acetic acid) are carbon compounds of importance in ourdaily life.What we have learnt
Key words
Hybridisation, allotropy, diamond, graphite, buckminsterfullerene,
nanotubes, catenation, tetravalency, hydrocarbons, alkanes, alkenes,
alkynes, saturated hydrocarbons, unsaturated hydrocarbons, functional
group, isomerism, homologous series, nomenclature, combustion,
oxidation, addition reaction, substitution reaction, ethanol, ethanoicacid, ester, esterification, saponification, micelle.
Free distribution by A.P. Government 337•The molecules of soap are sodium or potassium salts of long chain carboxylic acids.
•Detergents are ammonium or sulphonate salts of long chain carboxylic acids.
•The action of soaps and detergents is based on the presence of both hydrophobic and hydrophilic
groups in the molecule and this helps to emulsify the oily dirt and hence its removal.
1. Name the simplest hydrocarbon. (AS1)
2. What are the general molecular formulae of alkanes, alkenes and alkynes. (AS1)
3. Name the carboxylic acid used as a preservative. (AS1)
4. Name the product other than water formed on burning of ethanol in air. (AS1)
5. Give the IUPAC name of the following compounds. If more than one compound is possible
name all of them. (AS1)i. An aldehyde derived from ethane.
ii.  A ketone derived from butane.
iii.A chloride derived from propane.iv. An alcohol derived from pentane.
6. A mixture of oxygen and ethyne is burnt for welding; can you tell why a mixture of ethyne and air
is not used? (AS1)
7. Explain with the help of a chemical equation, how an addition reaction is used in vegetable ghee
industry. (AS1)
8. a. What are the various possible structural formulae of a compound having molecular formula
C
3H6O? (AS1)
    b. Give the IUPAC names of the above possible compounds and represent them in structures. (AS1)
    c. What is the similarity in these compounds? (AS1)
9. Name the simplest ketone and write its molecular formula. (AS1)
10. What do we call the Self linking property of carbon? (AS1)
11.  Name the compound formed by heating ethanol at 443 K with excess of conc. H2SO4. (AS1)
12.  Give an example for esterification reaction. (AS1)
13. Name the product obtained when ethanol is oxidized by either chromic anhydride or  alkaline
potassium permanganate. (AS1)
14. Write the chemical equation representing the reaction of preparation of ethanol from ethane.(AS1)
15. Write the IUPAC name of the next homologous of CH3OHCH2CH3.  (AS1)
16. Define homologous series of carbon compounds; Mention any two characteristics of homologous
series. (AS1)Improve your learning

Carbon and its Compounds 338 X Class17. Give the names of functional groups (i) -CHO (ii) -C=0.  (AS1)
18.  Why does carbon form compounds mainly by covalent bonding?  (AS1)
19. Allotropy is a property shown by which class substance: elements, compounds or mixtures?
Explain allotropy with suitable examples. (AS1)
20. Explain how sodium ethoxide is obtained from ethanol? Give chemical equations. (AS1)21. Describe with chemical equation how ethanoic acid may be obtained from ethanol. (AS1)
22. Explain the cleansing action of soap. (AS1)
23. Distinguish between esterification and saponification reactions of organic compounds. (AS1)
24.
Explain the structure of graphite in term of bonding and give one property based on this structure. (AS1)
25. Name the acid present in vinegar. (AS1)
26. What happens when a small piece of sodium is dropped into ethanol? (AS2)
27. Two carbon compounds A and B have molecular formula C3H8 and C3H6 respectively. Which
one of the two is most likely to show addition? Justify your answer. (AS2)
28. Suggest a test to find the hardness of water and explain the procedure. (AS3)
29. Suggest a chemical test to distinguish between ethanol and ethanoic acid and explain the
procedure.(AS3)
30. An organic compound ‘X’ with a molecular formula C2H6O undergoes oxidation with  alkaline
KMnO4 and forms the compound ‘Y’, that has molecular formula C2H4O2.    (AS3)
a. Identify ‘X’ and ‘Y’
b. Write your observation regarding the product when the compound ‘X’ is made to react
with compound ‘Y’ which is used as a preservative for pickles.
31. Prepare models of methane, ethane, ethene and ethyne molecules using clay balls and
      match sticks. (AS4)
32. Collect information about artificial ripening of fruits by ethylene. (AS4)33. Draw the electronic dot structure of ethane molecule (C
2H6). (AS5)
34. How do you appreciate the role of esters in everyday life. (AS6)
35. How do you condemn the use of alcohol as a social practice. (AS7)
36. An organic compound with molecular formula C2H4O2 produces brisk effervescence on addition
of sodium carbonate / bicarbonate. Answer the following:
a. Identify the organic compound. (AS1)
b. Write the chemical equation for the above reaction. (AS1)c. Name the gas evolved. (AS2)
d. How will you test the gas evolved? (AS3)
e. List two important uses of the above compound. (AS1)
Free distribution by A.P. Government 339Multiple choice questions37. 1ml glacial acetic acid and 1ml of ethanol are mixed together in a test tube. Few drops of
concentrate sulphuric acid is added in the mixture are warmed in a water bath for 5 min.   
Answer the following:
a. Name the resultant compound formed. (AS2)b. Represent the above change by a chemical equation. (AS1)
c. What term is given to such a reactions. (AS1)
d. What are the special characteristics of the compound formed? (AS1)
1. Carbon compounds containing double and triple bonds are called ________.
2. A compound which is basic constituent of many cough syrups __________ .
3. Very dilute solution of ethanoic acid ____________.4. A sweet odour substance formed by the reaction of an alcohol and a carboxylic acid is ___.
5. When sodium metal is dropped in ethanol _________ gas will be released.
6. The functional group present in methanol is _____________.7. IUPAC name of alkene containing 3 carbon atoms is _______________.
8. The first member of homologous series among alkynes is ___________.
9.The product that is formed by dehydration of ethanol in conc. sulphuric acid is ______.
10. Number of single covalent bonds in ammonia are __________.
11. Type of reactions shown by alkanes is ______________.
1. Which of the four test tubes containing the following chemicals shows the brisk  effervescence
when dilute acetic acid was added to them? [ ]
 i) KOH ii) NaHCO
3
 iii) K2CO3 iv) NaC l
a) i & ii b)  ii & iii c) i & iv d) ii & iii
2. Which of the following solution of acetic acid in water can be used as preservative? [ ]
a) 5-10% b) 10-15%
c) 15-20% d) 100%
3. The suffix used for naming an aldehyde is [ ]
a) -ol b) -al c) -one d) -eneFill in the blanks
Carbon and its Compounds 340 X Class4. Acetic acid, when dissolved in water, it dissociates into ions reversibly because it is a:[ ]
a) Weak acid b) strong acid
c) weak base d) strong base
5. Which one of the following hydrocarbon can show isomerism? [ ]
a) C2H4b) C2H6c) C3H8d. C4H10
6. Combustion of hydrocarbon is generally accompanied by the evolution of
a) Heat b) Light
c)  both heat and light d) Electric current.
7. 2ml of ethanoic acid was taken in each of the three test tubes A, B and C and 2ml, 4ml and  8ml
water was added to them, respectively. A clear solution is obtained in: [ ]
a)  Test tube A only b) Test tubes A & B only.
c) Test tubes B and C only d)  All the test tubes.
8. If 2 ml of acetic acid was added slowly in drops to 5ml of water then we will notice[ ]
a) The acid forms a separate layer on the top of water.b) Water forms a separate layer on the top of the acid.
c) Formation of a clear and homogenous solution.
d) Formation of a pink and clear solution.
9. A few drops of ethanoic acid were added to solid sodium carbonate. The possible results of the
reactions are: [ ]
a) A hissing sound was evolved b) Brown fumes evolved.
c) Brisk effervescence occurred. d)  A pungent smelling gas evolved.
10. When acetic acid reacts with ethyl alcohol, we add conc. H
2SO4, it acts as……….and the
      process is called………………….. [ ]
a)  Oxidizing agent, saponification
b)  Dehydrating agent, esterification
c)  Reducing agent, Esterification
d)  Acid & esterification
Free distribution by A.P. Government 341C.N.R. Rao was born in Bangalore in a Kannada family to Hanumantha
Nagesa Rao and Nagamma Nagesa Rao. He completed secondary school
leaving certificate in first class in 1947. He studied BSc at Central College,
Bangalore. He obtained his bachelor’s degree from Mysore University in
1951, in first class, and only at the age of seventeen. He obtained a master’sin chemistry from BHU two years later. In 1953 he was granted a scholarshipfor PhD in IIT Kharagpur. His first research paper was published in the AgraUniversity Journal of Research in 1954. He completed PhD in 1958, only
after two years and nine months, at age twenty-four.
  Rao is an eminent scientist and a well recognised international authority
    on solid state and materials chemistry.
He is currently the Head of the Scientific Advisory Council to the Prime Minister of India.
He has published over 1,400 research papers and 45 books.
Rao was awarded Hughes Medal by the Royal Society in 2000, and he was first recipient of the India
Science Award in 2004.
Some of the major areas of his research are transition metal oxide systems, (new synthesis and novelstructures, metal-insulator transitions, CMR materials, superconductivity, multiferroics etc), hybrid materialsand nanomaterials including nanotubes and graphene.
Rao’s current passion is graphene, the new wonder material, and artificial photosynthesis.
He was awarded ‘Bharat Ratna’  by the Government of India in the year 2013.Chintamani Nagesa Ramachandra RaoHomi J. Bhabha , (30 October 1909 – 24 January 1966) was a nuclear Physicist,
founding Director and Professor of Physics at TIFR, Mumbai. He is  known as
the father of the Indian Nuclear Programme. Bhabha was the founding director
of two well-known research institutions, namely the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research(TIFR) and the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre  both institutionswere the cornerstone of Indian development of nuclear reactors and nuclearenergy  which Bhabha also supervised as its director.
In January 1933, Bhabha received his doctorate in nuclear physics after
publishing his first scientific paper, “ The Absorption of Cosmic radiation ”. The
paper helped him win the Isaac Newton Studentship in 1934.
Starting his scientific career  from Great Britain, Bhabha returned to India and accepted a post of reader in
physics at theIndian Institute of Science(IISC),Bangalore, headed by Nobel Laurate Sir C.V .Raman. During
this time, Bhabha played a key role in convincing  Jawaharlal Nehru who later became India’s first PrimeMinister, to start the ambitious nuclear programme. In 1945, he established the Tata Institute of FundamentalResearch(TIFR),Bombay and set up the Atomic Energy Commission in 1948, serving its first chairman.  In the1950s, Bhabha represented India in IAEA conferences, and served as President of the  UN Conference on thePeaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in Geneva in 1955.
Bhabha gained international prominence after deriving a correct expression for the probability of scattering
positrons by electrons, a process now known as Bhabha scattering . His major contribution included his workon  Compton scattering, R-process and furthemore the advancement of nuclear physics. He was awardedPadma Bhushan by Government of India in 1954. In January 1966, Bhabha died in a plane crash near MontBlanc, while heading to Vienna, Austria to attend a meeting of theIAEA’s Scientific Advisory Committee.Homi Jehangir Bhabha

Reference Books 342 X ClassS.No. Name of the Book Author(s) Synopsis
1 Conceptual Physics Paul G Hewitt Explain the principles of Physics with
examples.
2. Feynman Lectures on Feynman Di scussions and analysis on concepts
Physics of Physics.
3. Flying circus of Jearl Walker Contains applications and
Physics daily life experiences.
4. Concise Inorganic J.D. Lee Explain s concepts in chemistry
Chemistry
5. Problems and Tarasova & Explains principles of Physics in a
Questions in School T arasov dialogue form. It is useful for seminors
Physics and symposiams
6. Physics Cutnell & Johnson Useful for teaching school Physics and
preparing for competition exams.
7. The elements of Atkins Explain the concepts of Physicsl
Physical Chemistry Chemistry in detail
8. Chemistry Mc Murray & Explains concepts of Chemistry
Fay in a simple way
9. Thinking Physics C Epstein Contains questions and reason behind
every scientific phenomena.
10. University Physics Harris Benson Contains good problems
11. Physics can be fun Y Perel man Contains good applications with
experiments
12. Vogali text book of Quantitative Jefery & Others An experimental book
Chemical Analysis
13. Organic Chemistry Wade Jr. & Singh Explain the concepts of Organic
Chemistry in detail
14. Vogali text book of Practical Jefery & Others An experimental book
Organic ChemistryREFERENCE BOOKS
WEBSITES  AND e-RESOURCES
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0010/001023/102321eb.pdf Provides ideason how to make school science equipment
using inexpensive materials.
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0007/000728/072808eb.pdf Provides ideas on how to make school science equipment
using inexpensive materials.
http://www.freeindia.org/biogrphies/greatscientists/has biographies of Indian scientists.http://www.calcuttaweb.com/people/snbose.shtml has some more biographies of Indian scientists.http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/gcsebitesize/chemistry/classifyingmaterials/contains exercises for assessing classification of
matter, atomic structure, bonding and formulae/equations for class VIII and above
http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/gcsebitesize/physics/electricity/has some thinking-type questions for class VIII and abovehttp://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/gcsebitesize/physics/forces/has excellent questions for classes VII, VIII and abovehttp://www.fordham.edu/Halshall/science/sciencebook.html is an internet sourcebook for the History of Sciencehttp://www.learner.org/resources/series90.html has a set of videos on the science of teaching sciencehttp://edugreen.teri.res.in/index.asp is a website for children that makes environmental learning funhttp://www.nuffieldcurriculumcentre.org/go/Default.htaml provides links to websites of various science projects that
undertake to enliven science teaching